


I was 88 years old the 15th of March. I was born in 1849, at Jackson
Parish, Louisiana. My mother's name was Mary Marlow, and father's
Henry Marlow.

I can't remember very much 'bout slavery 'cause I was awful small, but
I can remember that my mother's master, Colonel Threff died, and my
mother, her husband, and us three chillun was handed down to Colonel
Threff's poor kin folks. Colonel Threff owned about two or three
hundred head of niggers, and all of 'em was tributed to his poor kin.
Ooh wee! he sho' had jest a lot of them too! Master Joe Threff, one of
his poor kin, took my mother, her husband, and three of us chillun
from Louisiana to the Mississippi Line.

Down there we lived in a one-room log hut, and slept on homemade rail
bed steads with cotton, and sometimes straw, mostly straw summers and
cotton winners. I worked round the house and looked after de smaller
chillun--I mean my mother's chillun. Mostly we ate yeller meal corn
bread and sorghum malasses. I ate possums when we could get 'em, but
jest couldn't stand rabbit meat. Didn't know there was any Christmas
or holidays in dem days.

I can't 'membuh nothing 'bout no churches in slavery. I was a sinner
and loved to dance. I remembuh I was on the floor one night dancing
and I had four daughters on the floor with me and my son was playing
de music--that got me! I jest stopped and said I wouldn't cut another
step and I haven't. I'm a member of the Baptist Church and been for 25
or 30 years. I jined 'cause I wanted to be good 'cause I was an awful
sinner.

We had a overseer back on Colonel Threff's plantation and my mother
said he was the meanest man on earth. He'd jest go out in de fields
and beat dem niggers, and my mother told me one day he come out in de
field beating her sister and she jumped on him and nearly beat him
half to death and old Master come up jest in time to see it all and
fired dat overseer. Said he didn't want no man working fer him dat a
woman could whip.

After de war set us free my pappy moved us away and I stayed round
down there till I got to be a grown woman and married. You know I had
a pretty fine wedding 'cause my pappy had worked hard and commenced to
be prosperous. He had cattle, hogs, chickens and all those things like
that.

A college of dem niggers got together and packed up to leave
Louisiana. Me and my husband went with them. We had covered wagons,
and let me tell you I walked nearly all the way from Louisiana to
Oklahoma. We left in March but didn't git here till May. We came in
search of education. I got a pretty fair education down there but
didn't take care of it. We come to Oklahoma looking for de same thing
then that darkies go North looking fer now. But we got dissapointed.
What little I learned I quit taking care of it and seeing after it and
lost it all.

I love to fish. I've worked hard in my days. Washed and ironed for 30
years, and paid for dis home that way. Yes sir, dis is my home. My
mother died right here in dis house. She was 111 yeahs old. She is
been dead 'bout 20 yeahs.

I have three daughters here married, Sussie Pruitt, Bertie Shannon,
and Irene Freeman. Irene lost her husband, and he's dead now.
