

One of the oldest ex-slaves encountered in Missouri is "Aunt" Hannah
Allen of Fredericktown, who claims she is 107 years old. According to
Madison County records, Aunt Hannah gave her age as 82 when she made
application for a marriage license in Fredericktown in 1912.

In spite of her extreme age, Aunt Hannah is able to do all of the work
around her house and she frequently walks up town and back, a distance
of several blocks. Her eyesight is very good and even at her advanced
age she does not have to wear glasses. She claims her grandfather was a
white man and she attributes her unusual health to several causes. She
was well treated as a slave during her younger years when she was under
the ownership of a family named Bollinger. She is childless and has been
content to live on the same spot during the last 71 years. Being a
Negro, she naturally does not take life seriously but as she expresses
it "jes’ lives it like it comes".

In reviewing the incidents which she was able to recall on the occasion
of the writer’s recent visit to her home, she outlined her story as
follows:

"Down in Pocahontas, Arkansas, a man had 400 slaves and de boss would
allow an old colored man to have meetins every Saturday night and of a
Friday night dey would have a class meeting. Several of dem got religion
right out in de field and would kneel down in de cornfield. De boss went
home and told his wife he thought de slaves was losin’ their minds
'cause dey was all kneeling down in de field. De boss’ daughter also got
religion and went down to de mourners’ bench. De colored church finally
made de boss and his whole family get religion. De old white mistress
would sing and pray while she washed dishes, milked de cows, and made
biscuits. So dey called de doctor and he come and said dat God had got a
hold on her.

"One of de darkies had a baby out in de field about eleven o’clock one
morning. De doctor come out there to her. She was sick a long time
'cause she got too hot before de chile was born. After dis happened de
boss got to be a better man. Dis old boss at first would not let the
darkies have any church meetins.

"On Sunday dere at home de colored folks could get all de water dat ran
from de maple trees. De slaves would get through their work for de boss
and den dere would sometimes be three days when dey could work for
themselves. Den dey would get paid for working for others and den buy
clothes. Dey had de finest boots.

"Dey did not want de mistress to tell me when we was free ’cause dere
was only two of us slaves left there. De other slaves already done run
off. I did not want to leave. When I was a slave I learned to do a job
right or do it over. I learned to sew, cook, and spin. We set by de
fireside and picked a shoe full of cotton and den we could go to bed.
But you did a lot before you got dat shoe full of cotton when it was
pressed down. Dis was almost enough to pad a quilt with. De white
children would be getting their lessons den and dey used a pine torch
for a light to see by.

"I was paid nothin’ after slavery but just stayed with de boss and dey
gave me things like a calf, clothes, and I got to go to church with dem
and to camp meetings and picnics. Dey would have big basket meetings
with pies, hogs, sheep and de like. Dey did not allow me to go with
other colored girls if dey had no character. We all set down and ate at
de same table with de white folks and tended de sick together. Today if
de parents would make their children do like dey did in slavery, den we
would have a better race. I was better off dan de free people. I think
dat slavery taught me a lot.

"In Fredericktown I worked for my mistress’ sister and made $10 a month.
My father told me to always keep myself clean and nice and to comb my
hair. When I lived in Fredericktown de people I worked for always tried
to keep me from going out with de low class. After I washed de supper
dishes, I would have to go upstairs and cut out quilts and I did not
like it but it was good for me.

"My first husband gave $50 for dis lot I am living on. Dat was just at
de end of de war. He hauled de logs and chinked and white-washed dem and
we had two rooms and a hall. It was a good, nice, warm house. He was a
carpenter. About twenty-five years later my husband built him a frame
house here and dug him a well. He had 4 dozen chickens, 15 head of hogs,
2 horses, 2 wagons, and a buggy to go back and forth to de church at
Libertyville, New Tennessee, or Pilot Knob. We lived together fifty
years before he died. He left me dis home, three horses, 3 milk cows and
three hogs.

"We had no children but ’dopted a little boy. He was my husband’s
sister’s child. De boy’s mother took a notion that she wanted to work
out and she was just a young girl so we took de boy at about de age of
three and he was with us about six years. He went to a colored school
den but a white teacher taught him. We adopted a girl too from Marquand.
De girl’s father was a colored man and de mother was a white woman. De
woman den married a white man in Marquand and her husband did not want
de child so we took her at about three years old. We did not have her no
time ’til she died. We have helped to raise about a dozen children. But
I have quit doing dat now. I now has my second husband; he always liked
to have children around but we ain’t had none of our own.

"When my first husband died, he did not owe fifteen cents. He just would
not go in debt to nobody. He attended de Masonic lodge. After he died I
went to work. I brought wood, washed, ironed, and cooked. I have made as
high as $15 a week and keep. I took care of a man’s children after him
and his wife separated. We have had two houses burn down right here. One
of our houses was a little too close to Saline Creek and it was
condemned and we tore it down and built de one we have now, thirteen
years ago. Harry Newberry has a mill and he give us de lumber to build
dis house.

"We have a lot in de colored graveyard. I have no insurance but Mr.
Allen has some kind of insurance, so if he gets hurt traveling he will
get something. We is getting, together, $25 in pensions a month and we
is living pretty well right now. Some months we spend from seven to
eight dollars on food. Almost everything is cash for us. I been going
barefoot about ten years. I come mighty near going barefoot in de winter
time. We been getting a pension about two years and we was on relief for
two or three years before dat. Our biggest debt is a doctor bill of
about $60.

"Some of de colored folks is better off now and some is worser. De young
race says we who was slaves is ten times worse off den dey ’cause we had
bosses and couldn’t read or write. But I say de young race is got all
dis to go by and dey ought to be much better off dan dey is. We is
better off in one sense dan de young race ’cause about half of dem don’t
know how to raise their children and dey don’t know how to do nothing. I
think our folks has just as good a chance now as de white folks but dey
don’t get cultivated. Dey say today dat I don’t know nothing ’cause I
was a slave and all I learned was what de master learnt me. But I know
enough to keep out of devilment. I think all dis speed shows dat people
ain’t got no sense at all."

    *Interview with Aunt Hannah Allen,*
    *aged 107, Fredericktown, Mo.*
    *Interviewed by J. Tom Miles.*

"I’s born in 1830 on Castor River ’bout fourteen miles east of
Fredericktown, Mo. My birthday is December 24. Yes, sir, I is 107 years
old dey say and dey got de records up there in de court house to prove
it. De first time I married Adam Wringer in 1866 and was married by
Squire Addison in Fredericktown. In 1912 on August 11 me and de parson
was married in de Methodist church here and dis was de largest one in
Fredericktown. ’Bout six or seven hundred come for de celebration. I
guess I is ’bout de oldest person in Madison County.

"My father come from Perry County. He was named Abernathy. My father’s
father was a white man. My white people come from Castor and dey owned
my mother and I was two years old when my mother was sold. De white
people kept two of us and sold mother and three children in New Orleans.
Me and my brother George was kept by de Bollingers. This was in 1832. De
white people kept us in de house and I took care of de babies most of de
time but worked in de field a little bit. Dey had six boys.

"Our house joined on to de house of de white folks. Many times I slept
on de floor in front of de fireplace near de mistress. Dey got hold of a
big buffalo rug and I would sleep on it. De Bollinger boy, Billy
Bollinger, would go to de cabin and sleep with George, my brother. Dey
thought nothing of it. Old man Bollinger sent some colored folks up to
his farm in Sabula and Billy cried to go long with dem. He let Billy go.
I stayed with old Aunt Betsy on Castor River.

"Before de Civil War broke out we were at Sabula and a Mr. Schafer and
Mr. Bollinger started to take de slaves to Texas. Dey got as far as
Rockport, near Hot Springs. A man by de name of John Higdon from
Colorado married Olive Bollinger and he was injured in de arm in de
Battle of Fredericktown. Den John Higdon went to Rockport after he was
shot and had taken de oath of allegiance. Higdon’s wife died in Rockport
and she had a child two years old. I took de baby to care for. De wife
was to be buried back home so dey took de body in a wagon with just a
sheet over it towards Little Rock. I was sitting in de wagon holding de
two year old baby. On de way ’bout ten miles out we were captured by
Federal soldiers and took back to Rockport. De body was put in a room
for two weeks and den placed in a vault above de ground and stayed dar
for ’bout eight years before Mr. Higdon took it back home to bury.

"Higdon took me and his child to ’bout eight miles from Hot Springs to a
hotel he had bought. Once he come up to de hotel with two government
horses and put me and de child on a horse and we were on de way to
Little Rock. We rode dat way for ’bout two weeks and was captured again
near Benton. Higdon had on a Union cape. De soldiers asked us all ’bout
de horses, guns, child, etc. De soldiers let him keep his gun ’cause dey
said it wouldn’t kill a flea. But dey cut de buttons off de coat, and
took de spurs off of his heels and said he could not go any further. Dey
took me and de baby and made us sit on de ground. De soldiers took
Higdon to de river. It was late in de day. Dey said dey was going to
transfer him back to Missouri and sell de horses. Higdon had papers from
Col. Lowe and Chambers. De soldiers were Masons and after a while dey
all come back just a-laughing and shaking hands.

"We were put on a boat at Little Rock going toward St. Louis. De child
took de small pox from a lady on de boat. When we got on de boat dey
were firing at the wheels of de boat from across de river. I was feeding
de baby and de chamber-maid come out and said, ’I would drown him’. I
said, ’If you do dat you will have to drown me too’. Dey had Higdon
locked up on de boat and he did not get to see de baby for two weeks
when we got to St. Louis. Just as we got to St. Louis, two white ladies
saw de baby who was so sick and dey went out and got some clothes for
it. De doctor come on de boat and vaccinated me. De sores on the baby
were as big as half dollars.

"Den after we got to St. Louis we went to Whitworth’s in Ironton,
Missouri. Higdon was on de back porch and a soldier shot at him and took
him to headquarters dat night. Whitworth had some soldiers take us to
Sabula, twenty-five miles away. De soldiers den took Higdon back to
Ironton until de war was over. Higdon married three times.

"John, the baby, was raised by his grandmother and step-mother in St.
Louis. John married the daughter of a county clerk in Luxemburg,
Missouri. And he became county clerk for thirty years in dis county.
John died ’bout two years ago this July.

"I ’member how dey would treat one slave. De master took two boards and
tied one to de feet and another to de hands and tied her back with ropes
and whipped her with a cat-o’-nine-tails till she bled and den took salt
and pepper and put in de gashes. I can ’member when I was in Iron County
de soldiers stole de boss’ horse and de boss had to go to Patton to git
it. Once de soldiers made me get up in de smoke house and throw down
some ham. De authorities ’gaged de soldiers for stealing from de people.
I had to carry some stuff out for Sam Hildebrand to eat.

"I’ve been living here since de Civil War. Dis is de third house that I
built on dis spot. What I think ’bout slavery? Well we is gettin’ ’long
purty well now and I believe it’s best to not agitate."
