In a small house at 173 Phoenix Alley, N.E. lives a little old woman
about 5 ft. 2 in. in height, who is an ex-slave. She greeted the writer
with a bright smile and bade her enter and have a seat by the small fire
in the poorly lighted room. The writer vividly recalled the interview
she gave on slavery previously and wondered if any facts concerning
superstitions, conjure, signs, etc. could be obtained from her. After a
short conversation pertaining to everyday occurrences, the subject of
superstition was broached to Mrs. Avery. The idea amused her and she
gave the writer the following facts: As far as possible the stories are
given in her exact words. The interview required two days, November 30
and December 2, 1936.

"When you see a dog lay on his stomach and slide it is a true sign of
death. This is sho true cause it happened to me. Years ago when I lived
on Pine Street I was sitting on my steps playing with my nine-months old
baby. A friend uv mine came by and sat down; and as we set there a dog
that followed her began to slide on his stomach. It scared me; and I
said to her, did you see that dog? Yes, I sho did. That night my baby
died and it wuzn't sick at all that day. That's the truth and a sho sign
of death. Anudder sign of death is ter dream of a new-born baby. One
night not so long ago I dreamt about a new-born baby and you know I went
ter the door and called Miss Mary next door and told her I dreamed about
a new-born baby, and she said, Oh! that's a sho sign of death. The same
week that gal's baby over there died. It didn't surprise me when I heard
it cause I knowed somebody round here wuz go die." She continued:

"Listen, child! If ebber you clean your bed, don't you never sweep off
your springs with a broom. Always wipe 'em with a rag, or use a brush.
Jest as sho as you do you see or experience death around you. I took my
bed down and swept off my springs, and I jest happened to tell old Mrs.
Smith; and she jumped up and said, 'Child, you ought not done that
cause it's a sign of death.' Sho nuff the same night I lost another
child that wuz eight years old. The child had heart trouble, I think."

Mrs. Avery believes in luck to a certain extent. The following are
examples of how you may obtain luck:

"I believe you can change your luck by throwing a teaspoonful of sulphur
in the fire at zackly 12 o'clock in the day. I know last week I was
sitting here without a bit of fire, but I wuzn't thinking bout doing
that till a 'oman came by and told me ter scrape up a stick fire and put
a spoonful of sulphur on it; and sho nuff in a hour's time a coal man
came by and gave me a tub uv coal. Long time ago I used ter work fer
some white women and every day at 12 o'clock I wuz told ter put a
teaspoonful of sulphur in the fire."

"Another thing, I sho ain't going ter let a 'oman come in my house on
Monday morning unless a man done come in there fust. No, surree, if it
seem lak one ain't coming soon, I'll call one of the boy chilluns, jest
so it is a male. The reason fer this is cause women is bad luck."

The following are a few of the luck charms as described by Mrs. Avery:

"Black cat bone is taken from a cat. First, the cat is killed and
boiled, after which the meat is scraped from the bones. The bones are
then taken to the creek and thrown in. The bone that goes up stream is
the lucky bone and is the one that should be kept." "There is a boy in
this neighborhood that sells liquor and I know they done locked him up
ten or twelve times but he always git out. They say he carries a black
cat bone," related Mrs. Avery.

"The Devil's shoe string looks jest like a fern with a lot of roots. My
mother used to grow them in the corner of our garden. They are lucky.

"Majres (?) are always carried tied in the corner of a handkerchief. I
don't know how they make 'em.

"I bought a lucky stick from a man onct. It looked jest lak a candle,
only it wuz small; but he did have some sticks as large as candles and
he called them lucky sticks, too, but you had to burn them all night in
your room. He also had some that looked jest lak buttons, small and
round."

The following are two stories of conjure told by Mrs. Avery:

"I knowed a man onct long ago and he stayed sick all der time. He had
the headache from morning till night. One day he went to a old man that
wuz called a conjurer; this old man told him that somebody had stole the
sweat-band out of his cap and less he got it back, something terrible
would happen. They say this man had been going with a 'oman and she had
stole his sweat-band. Well, he never did get it, so he died.

"I had a cousin named Alec Heard, and he had a wife named Anna Heard.
Anna stayed sick all der time almost; fer two years she complained. One
day a old conjurer came to der house and told Alec that Anna wuz
poisoned, but if he would give him $5.00 he would come back Sunday
morning and find the conjure. Alec wuz wise, so he bored a hole in the
kitchen floor so that he could jest peep through there to der back
steps. Sho nuff Sunday morning the nigger come back and as Alec watched
him he dug down in the gound a piece, then he took a ground puppy, threw
it in the hole and covered it up. All right, he started digging again
and all at onct he jumped up and cried: 'Here 'tis! I got it.' 'Got
what?' Alec said, running to the door with a piece of board. 'I got the
ground puppy dat wuz buried fer her.' Alec wuz so mad he jumped on that
man and beat him most to death. They say he did that all the time and
kept a lot of ground puppies fer that purpose." Continuing, she
explained that a ground puppy was a worm with two small horns. They are
dug up out of the ground, and there is a belief that you will die if one
barks at you.

Mrs. Avery related two ways in which you can keep from being conjured by
anyone.

"One thing I do every morning is ter sprinkle chamber-lye [HW: (urine)]
with salt and then throw it all around my door. They sho can't fix you
if you do this. Anudder thing, if you wear a silver dime around your
leg they can't fix you. The 'oman live next door says she done wore two
silver dimes around her leg for 18 years."

Next is a story of the Jack O'Lantern.

"Onct when I wuz a little girl a lot of us chillun used to slip off and
take walnuts from a old man. We picked a rainy night so nobody would see
us, but do you know it looked like a thousand Jack ma' Lanterns got in
behind us. They wuz all around us. I never will ferget my brother
telling me ter get out in the path and turn my pocket wrong side out. I
told him I didn't have no pocket but the one in my apron; he said,
'well, turn that one wrong side out.' Sho nuff we did and they scattered
then."

Closing the interview, Mrs. Avery remarked: "That's bout all I know; but
come back some time and maybe I'll think of something else."
