JOHN BATES, 84, was born in Little Rock, Arkansas, a slave of Mock
     Bateman. When still very young, John moved with his mother, a slave
     of Harry Hogan, to Limestone Co., Texas. John now lives in
     Corsicana, supported by his children and an old age pension.


"My pappy was Ike Bateman, 'cause his massa's name am Mock Bateman, and
mammy's name was Francis. They come from Tennessee and I had four
brothers and six sisters. We jes' left de last part of de name off and
call it Bates and dat's how I got my name. Mammy 'longed to Massa Harry
Hogan and while I's small us move to Texas, to Limestone County, and I
don't 'member much 'bout pappy, 'cause I ain't never seed him since.

"Massa Hogan was a purty good sort of fellow, but us went hongry de fust
winter in Texas. He lived in de big log house with de hallway clean
through and a gallery clean 'cross de front. De chimney was big 'nough
to burn logs in and it sho' throwed out de heat. It was a good, big
place and young massa come out early and holler for us to git up and be
in de field.

"Missy Hogan was de good woman and try her dead level best to teach me
to read and write, but my head jes' too thick, I jes' couldn't larn. My
Uncle Ben he could read de Bible and he allus tell us some day us be
free and Massa Harry laugh, haw, haw, haw, and he say, 'Hell, no, yous
never be free, yous ain't got sense 'nough to make de livin' if yous was
free.' Den he takes de Bible 'way from Uncle Ben and say it put de bad
ideas in he head, but Uncle gits 'nother Bible and hides it and massa
never finds it out.

"We'uns goes to de big baptisin' one time and it's at de big sawmill
tank and 50 is baptise' and I's in dat bunch myself. But dey didn't have
no funerals for de slaves, but jes' bury dem like a cow or a hoss, jes'
dig de hole and roll 'em in it and cover 'em up.

"War come and durin' dem times jes' like today nearly everybody knows
what gwine on, news travels purty fast, and iffen de slaves couldn't git
it with de pass dey slips out after dark and go in another plantation by
de back way. Course, iffen dem patterrollers cotch dem it jus' too bad
and dey gits whip.

"When de news comes in dat us free, Massa Harry never call us up like
everybody else did the slaves, us has to go up and ask him 'bout it. He
come out on de front gallery and says we is free and turns 'round and
goes in de house without 'nother word. We all sho' feels sorry for him
the way he acts and hates to leave him, but we wants to go. We knowed he
wasn't able to give us nothin' so begins to scatter and 'bout ten or
fifteen days Massa Harry dies. I think he jes' grieve himself to death,
all he trouble comin' on him to once.

"Us worked on diff'rent farms till I marries and my fust wife am Emma
Williams and a cullud preacher marries us at her house. Us picked cotton
after dat and den I rents a place on de halvers for five year and after
sev'ral years I buys eighty acres of land. Fin'ly us done paid dat out
and done some repairs and den us sep'rate after livin' twenty-three year
together. So I gives dat place to her and de six chillen and I walks out
ready to start all over 'gain.

"Then I meets Sarah Jones and us marries, but she gives me de
divorcement. All dis time I works on a farm for de day wages, den I
rents 'nother farm on de halvers on de black land and stays dere sev'ral
year. Fin'ly I gits de job workin' at de cotton oil mill in Corsicana
and stays at dat job till dey says I's too old. I done buy dis li'l home
here and now has a place to live. Sarah done come back to me and us has
seven chillen. One of de boys works at de cotton oil mill and two works
at de compress right here in Corsicana and one works at de beer place in
Dallas.

"Us raises a li'l on dese two lots and de chillen brings some from de
farm, I mean my fust wife's chillen, and with de pension check us manage
to live a li'l longer. Us boys pays de taxes and de insurance for us.
