_GABR’EL BLOW SOF’! GABR’EL BLOW LOUD!_

When "Gabr’el take his silver trump," he is going to blow soft for the
saved and loud for the lost souls, according to Ank Bishop who was born
into slavery eighty-nine years ago, and lives in Livingston, Alabama.
The days before the war were as good as the present, Ank believes. He
tells of them in the following story of his life:

"My name is Ank Bishop, en I was born in 1849, August 16th, at Ward,
Alabama. My mother’s name was Amy Larken, an’ my father was Tom Bishop.
I had three brothers, Alf, Volen an’ Jim, an’ two sisters, Cely an’
Matildy. Us belonged to Lady Liza Larkin at Ward, right nigh Coke’s
Chapel.

"My mother was brought out from South Car’lina in a speculator drove,
an’ Lady Liza bought her at de auction at Coke’s Chapel. She lef’ her
mammy an’ daddy back dere in South Car’lina an’ never did see ’em no
more in dis life. She was bidded off an’ Lady Liza got her, jes’ her one
from all her family. She was got fer Lady Liza’s house gal. But
sometimes she cooked or was de washer, den ag’in de milker. ’Twas my job
for to min’ de ca’ves. Sometimes I went to Mr. Ed Western’s sto’ at
Gaston, three miles from us house, to see iffen was any mail for Lady
Liza, but ’twa’n’t none.

"Dey was good to us ’caze Lady Liza’s son, Mr. Willie Larkin, was de
overseer for his ma, but co’se sometime dey git among ’em an’ thrashed
'em out. One time one de niggers runned away, old Caesar Townsy, an’ dey
sarnt for Dick Peters to come an’ bring his "nigger dogs." Dem dogs was
trained to ketch a nigger same as rabbit dogs is trained to ketch a
rabbit. So Mr. Willie Larkin told Stuart for to say to old man Dick
Peters when he come, ’I’m gone,’ but for him to come on. ’I’m gwineter
keep de road,’ he say, ’an’ cross ’Bigbee at Moscow landin’.’ So ol’
Dick Peters, he kept de road lack he tole him to, an’ he cross ’Bigbee
at Moscow landin’ over in de cane-brake. But dem nigger dogs didn’t
never ketch ol’ man Caesar. He stayed right wharever he was at ’twell
after S’render, an’ de War done ceased. Den he come out, but iffen he
had a been caught, dey’d a used him up pretty rough, but he stayed hid
twell de time done passed.

"All de women on Lady Liza’s place had to go to de fiel’ ev’y day an’
dem what had suckerlin’ babies would come in ’bout nine o’clock in de
mawnin’ an’ when de bell ring at twelve an’ suckerlin’ ’em. One woman
tended to all of ’em in one house. Her name was Ellie Larkin, an’ dey
call her ’Mammy Larkin.’ She all time sarnt me down in de fiel’ for to
git ’em come suckle de chillen, ’caze dat made hit hard on her when dey
gets hongry an’ cry.

"Us didn’t get to go to church none, an’ us wa’n’t larnt nothin’. I’m
nigh ’bout ninety an’ I can’t read a line. I got some chillun kin read;
one can’t whut is sixty-five, but Henry he fifteen an’ he kin. De ma,
she go by de name of Pearlie Beasley, she can’t read neither, but she’s
a good fiel’ han’ an’ she patched dese breeches I’m wearin’ an’ dis ole
shirt. Miss, I ain’t got a coat to my name. Can’t go to church, so I
doan’ know dat dis any better’n slav’y time. Hit’s hard, anyway you got
to travel, got yo’ nose on de groun’ rock all de time. When pay day
come, ain’t nothin’ pay wid. Come git de rent, den you out do’s ag’in.
Bred an’ bawn in Sumter County, wore out in Sumter County, ’specks to
die in Sumter County, an’ whut is I got? Ain’t got nothin’, ain’t got
nothin’, ain’t got nothin’.

[Illustration: _Ank Bishop, Livingston, Alabama_]

"But I’m a believer, an’ dis here voodoo an’ hoodoo an’ sper’ts ain’t
nothin’ but a lot of folk’s outten Christ. Ha’nts ain’t nothin’ but
somebody died outten Christ an’ his sper’t ain’t at res’, jes’ in a
wand’rin’ condition in de world.

"Dis is de evil sper’t what de Bible tells about when hit say a person
has got two sper’ts, a good one an’ a evil one. De good sper’t goes to a
place of happiness an’ rest, an’ you doan’ see hit no mo’, but de evil
sper’t ain’t got no place to go. Hit’s dwellin’ place done tore down
when de body died, an’ hit’s jes’ a wand’rin’ an a waitin’ for Gabr’el
to blow his trump, den de worl’ gwineter come to an en’. But when God
say, ’Take down de silver mouf trump an’ blow, Gabr’el,’ an’ Gabr’el
say, ’Lord, how loud shell I blow?’ Den de Lord say, ’Blow easy,
Gabr’el, en ca’m, not to ’larm my lilies.’ De secon’ time Gabr’el say,
'How loud mus’ I blow, Lord?’ Den de Lord say, ’Blow hit as loud as
seben claps of thunder all added into one echo, so as to wake up dem
damnable sper’ts sleepin’ in de grave-ya’ds what ain’t never made no
peace wid dey God, jes’ alayin’ dere in dey sins.’

"But de Christ’en Army, hit gits up wid de fus’ trump, an’ dem what is
deef is de evil ones what anybody kin see anytime. I ain’t skeered of
’em, though. I passes ’em an’ goes right on plowin’, but iffen you wants
’em to git outten your way, all you gotter do is jes’ turn your head
least bit an’ look back. Dey gone jes’ lack dat! When my fus’ wife died
’bout thirty years ago, I was goin’ up to Gaston to see Sara Drayden,
ole Scot Drayden’s wife, an’ I tuck out through Kennedy bottom ’bout
sundown right after a rain. I seed sompin acomin’ down de road ’bout dat
high, ’bout size a little black shaggy dog, an’ I says, ’What’s dat I
sees commin’ down de road? Ain’t nobody ’roun’ here got no black shaggy
dog? Hit kep’ a-comin’ an’ kep’ a-gittin’ bigger an’ bigger an’ closer
an’ closer, an’ time hit got right to me ’twas as big as a ha’f growed
yearlin’, black as a crow. It had four feet an’ drop years, jes’ lack a
dog, but ’twa’n’t no dog, I knows dat. Den he shy out in de bushes, an’
he come right back in de road, an’ hit went on de way I was comin’ from,
so I went on de way hit was comin’ from. I ain’t never seed dat thing no
mo’. But I’ze gotter pretty good notion ’bout who hit ’twas."
