
I was born 7 miles north of Palestine, Texas, on Matt Swanson's place
in 1850, but I kin not remember the date. My mistress was name Celia
Swanson. My mistress was so good to me till I jest loved her.

My family and all slaves on our place was treated good. Mighty few
floggings went on 'round and about. Master was the overseer over his
darkies and didn't use no other'n. I waited table and churned in the
Big House.

I ate at the table with my mistress and her family and nothing was
evah said. We ate bacon, greens, Irish potatoes and such as we git
now. Aunt Chaddy was the cook and nurse for all the chillun on the
place.

We used to hear slaves on de other places hollering from whippings,
but master never whipped his niggers 'less they lied. Sometimes slaves
from other places would run off and come to our place. Master would
take them back and tell the slave-holders how to treat them so dey
wouldn't run off again.

Mistress had a little stool for me in the big house, and if I got
sleepy, she put me on the foot of her bed and I stayed there til
morning, got up washed my face and hands and got ready to wait on the
table.

There was four or five hundred slaves on our place. One morning during
slavery, my father killed 18 white men and ran away. They said he was
lazy and whipped him, and he just killed all of 'em he could, which
was 18 of 'em. He stayed away 3 years without being found. He come
back and killed 7 before they could kill him. When he was on the place
he jest made bluing.

My mother worked in the field and weaved cloth. Shirts dat she made
lasted 12 months, even if wore and washed and ironed every day. Pants
could not be ripped with two men pulling on dem with all their might.
You talking 'bout clothes, them was some clothes then. Clothes made
now jest don't come up to them near abouts.

Doing of slavery, we had the best church, lots better than today. I am
a Baptist from head to foot, yes sir, yes sir. Jest couldn't be
nothing else. In the first place, I wouldn't even try.

I knows when the war started and ceaseted. I tell you it was some war.
When it was all over, the Yankees come thoo' singing, "You may die
poor but you won't die a slave."

When the War was over, master told us that we could go out and take
care of the crops already planted and plant the ones that need
planting 'cause we knowed all 'bout the place and we would go halvers.
We stayed on 3 years after slavery. We got a little money, but we got
room and board and didn't have to work too hard. It was enough
difference to tell you was no slaves any more.

After slavery and when I was old enough I got married. I married a gal
that was a daughter of her master. He wanted to own her, but she sho'
didn't return it. He kept up with her till he died and sent her money
jest all the time. Before he died, he put her name in his will and
told his oldest son to be sure and keep up with her. The son was sure
true to his promise, for till she died, she was forever hearing from
him or he would visit us, even after we moved to Oklahoma from Texas.

Our chillun and grandchillun will git her part since she is gone. She
was sure a good wife and for no reason did I take the second look at
no woman. That was love, which don't live no more in our hearts.

I make a few pennies selling fish worms and doing a little yard work
and raising vegetables. Not much money in circulation. When I gets my
old age pension, it will make things a little mite better. I guess the
time will be soon.

Tain't nothing but bad treatment that makes people die young and I
ain't had none.
