


Mrs. Boysaw has been a citizen of this community about sixty-five years.
She resides on a small farm, two miles east of Brazil on what is known
as the Pinkley Street Road. This has been her home for the past forty
years. Her youngest son and the son of one of her daughters lives with
her. She is still very active, doing her housework and other chores
about the farm. She is very intelligent and according to statements made
by other citizens has always been a respected citizen in the community,
as also has her entire family. She is the mother of twelve children.
Mrs. Boysaw has always been an active church worker, spending much time
in missionary work for the colored people. Her work was so outstanding
that she has been often called upon to speak, not only in the colored
churches, but also in white churches, where she was always well
received. Many of the most prominent people of the community number Mrs.
Boysaw as one of their friends and her home is visited almost daily by
citizens in all walks of life. Her many acts of kindness towards her
neighbors and friends have endeared her to the people of Brazil, and
because of her long residence in the community, she is looked upon as
one of the pioneers.

Mrs. Boysaw's husband has been dead for thirty-five years. Her children
are located in various cities throughout the country. She has a daughter
who is a talented singer, and has appeared on programs with her daughter
in many churches. She is not certain about her age, but according to her
memory of events, she is about eighty-seven.

Her story as told to the writer follows:

"When the Civil War ended, I was living near Richmond, Virginia. I am
not sure just how old I was, but I was a big, flat-footed woman, and had
worked as a slave on a plantation. My master was a good one, but many of
them were not. In a way, we were happy and contented, working from sun
up to sun down. But when Lincoln freed us, we rejoiced, yet we knew we
had to seek employment now and make our own way. Wages were low. You
worked from morning until night for a dollar, but we did not complain.
About 1870 a Mr. Masten, who was a coal operator, came to Richmond
seeking laborers for his mines in Clay County. He told us that men could
make four to five dollars a day working in the mines, going to work at
seven and quitting at 3:30 each day. That sounded like a Paradise to our
men folks. Big money and you could get rich in little time. But he did
not tell all, because he wanted the men folk to come with him to
Indiana. Three or four hundred came with Mr. Masten. They were brought
in box cars. Mr. Masten paid their transportation, but was to keep it
out of their wages. My husband was in that bunch, and the women folk
stayed behind until their men could earn enough for their transportation
to Indiana."

"When they arrived about four miles east of Brazil, or what was known as
Harmony, the train was stopped and a crowd of white miners ordered them
not to come any nearer Brazil. Then the trouble began. Our men did not
know of the labor trouble, as they were not told of that part. Here they
were fifteen hundred miles from home, no money. It was terrible. Many
walked back to Virginia. Some went on foot to Illinois. Mr. Masten took
some of them South of Brazil about three miles, where he had a number of
company houses, and they tried to work in his mine there. But many were
shot at from the bushes and killed. Guards were placed about the mine by
the owner, but still there was trouble all the time. The men did not
make what Mr. Masten told them they could make, yet they had to stay for
they had no place to go. After about six months, my husband who had been
working in that mine, fell into the shaft and was injured. He was unable
to work for over a year. I came with my two children to take care of
him. We had only a little furniture, slept in what was called box beds.
I walked to Brazil each morning and worked at whatever I could get to
do. Often did three washings a day and then walked home each evening, a
distance of two miles, and got a dollar a day.

"Many of the white folks I worked for were well to do and often I would
ask the Mistress for small amounts of food which they would throw out if
left over from a meal. They did not know what a hard time we were
having, but they told me to take home any of such food that I cared to.
I was sure glad to get it, for it helped to feed our family. Often the
white folks would give me other articles which I appreciated. I managed
in this way to get the children enough to eat and later when my husband
was able to work, we got along very well, and were thankful. After the
strike was settled, things were better. My husband was not afraid to go
out after dark. But the coal operators did not treat the colored folks
very good. We had to trade at the Company store and often pay a big
price for it. But I worked hard and am still alive today, while all the
others are gone, who lived around here about that time. There has sure
been a change in the country. The country was almost a wilderness, and
where my home is today, there were very few roads, just what we called a
pig path through the woods. We used lots of corn meal, cooked beans and
raised all the food we could during them days. But we had many white
friends and sure was thankful for them. Here I am, and still thankful
for the many friends I have."
