


"Some white men called in question today about de reigning governor
enduring time of de Civil War. I knowed dat, and 'cides dat, I knowed
him well. It was Governor 'Bill' as us called him.

"What you want to git, is history about muster grounds. Yes, it was on
Jones Ferry Road, jest south of Cross Keys whar dey had what dey allus
called de muster field. Now, Jones Ferry Road leads across Enoree River
into Laurens County. Enoree River is de thing dat devides Union County
from Laurens County, dat it is.

"Well as I remember, Mr. Bill Ray was in de mustering of de 18th
Regiment. Billy, Robert, Sara and Miss Nancy was Mr. Alex's chilluns.
Understand me, don't think dat Bob and Sam was in de Regiment ...
satisfied Billy was, kaise he used to pass our house on horse back,
coming from de Laurens side where he lived.

"Sixteen-year-old boys come in de same time dat I did. Course I ain't
told all dat I knows, kaise dat wouldn't be proper. All I tell you, I
wants it to be recognized. De better it's done, de better it'll help
you.

"I goes from home and stays five days or more, and don't nothing happen
to a thing at my home. I does fer de sick and de Lawd blesses me. He
looks atter my things while I am away. He soon shows his presence atter
I gits dar. He calls fer me and I feeds Him.

"Once had 26 biles (boils). Dat make me consider my disobedience against
de Lawd. Den I went to Him in prayer. He told me Satan done got ahead of
Him. Dat show me dat I done forgot to be particular. I got mo' 'ticular
and pray mo' often, and in six weeks my biles had done all gone.

"Dar is times when I gits lost fer not knowing. I can't keep up, kaise I
cannot read. Man in Sunday school reads and I hears. He read de olden
Testament; den he read de new Testament. Dat my schooling. I 'clar unto
you, I got by all my life by praying and thinking. I sho does think a
lot. ('Uncle' George's facial and scalp muscles work so when he thinks,
that his straw hat moves up and down.)

"When good man prays fer bad man, de Holy Ghost works on bad man's
consciousness, and afo' he knows it, he's a-saying 'Lawd have Mercy'
'stead of 'G'dam', like all wicked folks says every day. He--dat de Holy
Ghost dat I still is speaking of--jest penetrates de wicked man's
consciousness widout him a-knowing it. Dat penetrating make de bad man
say, 'Lawd have Mercy.' I hoes and I cuts sprouts, and den I plows. When
you plows, mules is allus so aggravating dat dey gits you all ruffled
up. Dat de devil a-working at you. Dat's all old mules is anyhow. I does
not cuss, nohow, kaise it sho am wicked and I is had de Holy Spirit in
my soul, now gone sixty-five years, since I jined Padgett Creek Church.
When my old mule gits to de row's end, and he act mulish--kaise dat's in
him and he don't know nothing else to do--I means to say either 'ha' or
'gee', and often since I jined Padgett Creek Church I finds myself
saying 'Lawd have Mercy' 'stead of 'gee' or 'ha'. So you see dat de Lawd
has command, whar-so-ever if I was wicked, Satan would.

"A child fo God allus will agree wid de Word of God. We mens dat claim
to be leaders in de Kingdom, got to step up and sho folks what dey must
do. Man learns right smart from Exodus 'bout how to lead. A male child
was born to rule de world. Moses still de strongest impression dat we
has as rulers. God gits Hisself into de heads of men dat he wants to
rule and He don't tell nobody else nothing 'bout it neither.

"Mr. Roosevelt de president and he sho looks atter de po' folks. He
ain't no ig'nant man neither, kaise he got de light. Folks ain't a-gwine
to drown him out neither wid dere wicked words 'gainst him, kaise he
strive in de Lawd's name to do His will. Mr. Roosevelt got learning like
I is from de throne of God. He may have education also, but if he is, he
sho knows how to keep dem both jined together. Folks reads to me how he
got crippled and how he washed in dem springs in Georgia, and dat keep
him a-gwine right on anyhow. It ain't dem springs by deself, but it's
God a dipping his hand down dar fer de President to git well. Oh yes,
suh, I knows dat he twan't de president when he was a-washing, but dem
de plans dat de Lawd had done already planned and you and me never
know'd nothing 'bout all dat. You and me does not know what is planned
up in sto' fer us in de future neither.

"I is a Baptist, and at Padgett's Creek we does not believe in no
back-sliding. 'Once in de Spirit, allus in de Spirit'. A child of your'n
is allus a child of your'n. Dat de way de Baptist teach--once a child of
God, allus God's child. T'ain't no sech thing as drapping back. If you
draps back, you ain't never been no child of de Lawd, and you never had
no business being baptized. Christ was baptized in de waters of Jordan,
won't (weren't) He? Well, He never drapped back, did He? He say we must
follow in His footsteps, didn't He? Well, dar you is, and dat's all dar
is to it.

"God gits in de heads of men to help de aged and de po' also. I never
axes fer nothing, but when I sets around de courthouse and informs men
as I been doing dis evening, de Lawd has dem to drap a nickle or a dime
or a quarter in my hand but He never gits dem to a half of a dollar."

  Source: George Briggs, (88) Rt. 2, Union, S. C.
          Interviewer: Caldwell Sims, Union, S. C. (7/12/37)
