


"My old man can 'member things and tell you things and he word carry. We
marry to Turkey Hill Plantation. Hot supper. Cake, wine, and all. Kill
cow, hog, chicken and all. That time when you marry, so much to eat!
Finance wedding! Now--

"We 'lamp-oil chillun'; they 'lectric light' chillun now! We call our
wedding 'lamp-oil wedding'. Hall jam full o' people; out-of-door jam
full. Stand before the chimbley.

"When that first war come through, we born. I don't know just when I
smell for come in the world.

"Big storm? Yinnah talk big storm hang people up on tree? (Noah!) Shake?
I here in house. House gone, 'Rack-a-rack-a-racker!'

"My husband run out--with me and my baby left in bed! Baby just come in
time of the shake.

"When I first have sense, I 'member I walk on the frost bare-feet.
Cow-belly shoe.

"My husband mother have baby on the flat going to Marion and he Auntie
Cinda have a baby on that flat.

"From yout (youth) I been a Brown and marry a Brown; title never change.

"Old timey sing?

  1.

  "Wish I had a hundred dog
  And half wuz hound!
  Take it in my fadder field
  And we run the rabbit down!
  Chorus: Now he hatch
  He hatch!
  He hatch!
  And I run the rabbit down!

  2.

  "I wish I had a hundred head o' dog
  And half of them wuz hound
  I'd take 'em back in my bacco field
  And run the rabbit down.
  Chorus: Now he hatch--he hatch!
  He hatch--he hatch!
  Now he hatch--he hatch!
  And I run them rabbit down!"

"That wuz a sing we used to have on the plantation. Then we make up
sing--we have sing for chillun. Make 'em go sleep. Every one have his
own sing.

  "Bye-o-baby!
  Go sleepy!
  Bye-o-baby!
  Go sleepy!
  What a big alligator
  Coming to catch
  This one boy!"

  "Diss here the Watson one boy child!
  Bye-o-baby go sleepy!
  What a big alligator
  Coming to catch this one boy!"

Emmie Jordan: "Missus, I too plague with bad heart trouble to give you
the sing!"

  Song and conversation Given by

  Mom Louisa Brown (Born time of 'Reb people War')
  Waverly Mills, S. C.
  Near Parkersville, S. C.
