


This paper was prepared after several interviews had been obtained with
the subject of this sketch.

Dr. George Washingtin [TR: Washington] Buckner, tall, lean, whitehaired,
genial and alert, answered the call of his door bell. Although anxious
to oblige the writer and willing to grant an interview, the life of a
city doctor is filled with anxious solicitation for others and he is
always expecting a summons to the bedside of a patient or a professional
interview has been slated.

Dr. Buckner is no exception and our interviews were often disturbed by
the jingle of the door bell or a telephone call.

Dr. Buckner's conversation lead in ever widening circles, away from the
topic under discussion when the events of his own life were discussed,
but he is a fluent speaker and a student of psychology. Psychology as
that philosophy relates to the mental and bodily tendencies of the
African race has long since become one of the major subjects with which
this unusual man struggles. "Why is the negro?" is one of his deepest
concerns.

Dr. Buckner's first recollections center within a slave cabin in
Kentucky. The cabin was the home of his step-father, his invalid mother
and several children. The cabin was of the crudest construction, its
only windows being merely holes in the cabin wall with crude bark
shutters arranged to keep out snow and rain. The furnishings of this
home consisted of a wood bedstead upon which a rough straw bed and
patchwork quilts provided meager comforts for the invalid mother. A
straw bed that could be pushed under the bed-stead through the day was
pulled into the middle of the cabin at night and the wearied children
were put to bed by the impatient step-father.

The parents were slaves and served a master not wealthy enough to
provide adaquately for their comforts. The mother had become invalidate
through the task of bearing children each year and being deprived of
medical and surgical attention.

The master, Mr. Buckner, along with several of his relatives had
purchased a large tract of land in Green County, Kentucky and by a
custom or tradition as Dr. Buckner remembers; land owners that owned no
slaves were considered "Po' White Trash" and were scarcely recognized as
citizens within the state of Kentucky.

Another tradition prevailed, that slave children should be presented to
the master's young sons and daughters and become their special property
even in childhood. Adherring to that tradition the child, George
Washington Buckner became the slave of young "Mars" Dickie Buckner, and
although the two children were nearly the same age the little mulatto
boy was obedient to the wishes of the little master. Indeed, the slave
child cared for the Caucasian boy's clothing, polished his boots, put
away his toys and was his playmate and companion as well as his slave.

Sickness and suffering and even death visits alike the just and the
unjust, and the loving sympathetic slave boy witnessed the suffering and
death of his little white friend. Then grief took possession of the
little slave, he could not bear the sight of little Dick's toys nor
books not [TR: nor?] clothing. He recalls one harrowing experience after
the death of little Dick Buckner. George's grandmother was a housekeeper
and kitchen maid for the white family. She was in the kitchen one late
afternoon preparing the evening meal. The master had taken his family
for a visit in the neighborhood and the mulatto child sat on the veranda
and recalled pleasanter days. A sudden desire seized him to look into
the bed room where little Mars Dickie had lain in the bed. The evening
shadows had fallen, exagerated by the influence of trees, and vines, and
when he placed his pale face near the window pane he thought it was the
face of little Dickie looking out at him. His nerves gave away and he
ran around the house screaming to his grandmother that he had seen
Dickie's ghost. The old colored woman was sympathetic, dried his tears,
then with tears coursing down her own cheeks she went about her duties.
George firmly believed he had seen a ghost and never really convinced
himself against the idea until he had reached the years of manhood. He
remembers how the story reached the ears of the other slaves and they
were terrorized at the suggestion of a ghost being in the master's home.
"That is the way superstitions always started" said the Doctor, "Some
nervous persons received a wrong impression and there were always others
ready to embrace the error."

Dr. Buckner remembers that when a young daughter of his master married,
his sister was given to her for a bridal gift and went away from her own
mother to live in the young mistress' new home. "It always filled us
with sorrow when we were separated either by circumstances of marriage
or death. Although we were not properly housed, properly nourished nor
properly clothed we loved each other and loved our cabin homes and were
unhappy when compelled to part."

"There are many beautiful spots near the Green River and our home was
situated near Greensburgh, the county seat of Dreen [TR: Green?]
County." The area occupied by Mr. Buckner and his relatives is located
near the river and the meanderings of the stream almost formed a
peninsula covered with rich soil. Buckner's hill relieved the landscape
and clear springs bubled through crevices affording much water for
household use and near those springs white and negro children met to
enjoy themselves.

"Forty years after I left Greensburg I went back to visit the springs
and try to meet my old friends. The friends had passed away, only a few
merchants and salespeople remembered my ancestors."

A story told by Dr. Buckner relates an evening at the beginning of the
Civil War. "I had heard my parents talk of the war but it did not seem
real to me until one night when mother came to the pallet where we slept
and called to us to 'Get up and tell our uncles good-bye.' Then four
startled little children arose. Mother was standing in the room with a
candle or a sort of torch made from grease drippings and old pieces of
cloth, (these rude candles were in common use and afforded but poor
light) and there stood her four brothers, Jacob, John, Bill, and Isaac
all with the light of adventure shining upon their mulatto countenances.
They were starting away to fight for their liberties and we were greatly
impressed."

Dr. Buckner stated that officials thought Jacob entirely too aged to
enter the service as he had a few scattered white hairs but he remembers
he was brawny and unafraid. Isaac was too young but the other two uncles
were accepted. One never returned because he was killed in battle but
one fought throughout the war and was never wounded. He remembers how
the white men were indignant because the negroes were allowed to enlist
and how Mars Stanton Buckner was forced to hide out in the woods for
many months because he had met slave Frank Buckner and had tried to kill
him. Frank returned to Greensburg, forgave his master and procurred a
paper stating that he was at fault, after which Stanton returned to
active service. "Yes, the road has been long. Memory brings back those
days and the love of my mother is still real to me, God bless her!"

Relating to the value of an education Dr. Buckner hopes every Caucassian
and Afro-American youth and maiden will strive to attain great heights.
His first efforts to procure knowledge consisted of reciting A.B.S.s
[TR: A.B.C.s?] from the McGuffy's [HW: ?] Blue backed speller with his
unlettered sister for a teacher. In later years he attended a school
conducted by the Freemen's Association. He bought a grammar from a white
school boy and studied it at home. When sixteen years of age he was
employed to teach negro children and grieves to recall how limited his
ability was bound to have been. "When a father considers sending his son
or daughter to school, today, he orders catalogues, consults his friends
and considers the location and surroundings and the advice of those who
have patronized the different schools. He finally decides upon the
school that promises the boy or girl the most attractive and comfortable
surroundings. When I taught the African children I boarded with an old
man whose cabin was filled with his own family. I climbed a ladder
leading from the cabin into a dark uncomfortable loft where a comfort
and a straw bed were my only conveniences."

Leaving Greensburg the young mulatto made his way to Indianapolis where
he became acquainted with the first educated Negro he had ever met. The
Negro was Robert Bruce Bagby, then principal of the only school for
Negroes in Indianapolis. "The same old building is standing there today
that housed Bagby's institution then," he declares.

Dr. Buckner recalls that when he left Bagby's school he was so low
financially he had to procure a position in a private residence as house
boy. This position was followed by many jobs of serving tables at hotels
and eating houses, of any and all kinds. While engaged in that work he
met Colonel Albert Johnson and his lovely wife, both natives of Arkansas
and he remembers their congratulations when they learned that he was
striving for an education. They advised his entering an educational
institution at Terre Haute. His desire had been to enter that
institution of Normal Training but felt doubtful of succeeding in the
advanced courses taught because his advantages had been so limited, but
Mrs. Johnson told him that "God gives his talents to the different
species and he would love and protect the negro boy."

After studying several years at the Terre Haute State Normal George W.
Buckner felt assured that he was reasonably prepared to teach the negro
youths and accepted the professorship of schools at Vincennes,
Washington and other Indiana Villages. "I was interested in the young
people and anxious for their advancement but the suffering endured by my
invalid mother, who had passed into the great beyond, and the memory of
little Master Dickie's lingering illness and untimely death would not
desert my consciousness. I determined to take up the study of medical
practice and surgery which I did."

Dr. Buckner graduated from the Indiana Electic Medical College in 1890.
His services were needed at Indianapolis so he practiced medicine in
that city for a year, then located at Evansville where he has enjoyed an
ever increasing popularity on account of his sympathetic attitude among
his people.

"When I came to Evansville," says Dr. Buckner, "there were seventy white
physicians practicing in the area, they are now among the departed.
Their task was streneous, roads were almost impossible to travel and
those brave men soon sacrificed their lives for the good of suffering
humanity." Dr. Buckner described several of the old doctors as "Striding
[TR: illegible handwritten word above 'striding'] a horse and setting
out through all kinds of weather."

Dr. Buckner is a veritable encyclopedia of negro lore. He stops at many
points during an interview to relate stories he has gleaned here and
there. He has forgotten where he first heard this one or that one but it
helps to illustrate a point. One he heard near the end of the war
follows, and although it has recently been retold it holds the interest
of the listener. "Andrew Jackson owned an old negro slave, who stayed
on at the old home when his beloved master went into politics, became an
American soldier and statesman and finally the 7th president of the
United States. The good slave still remained through the several years
of the quiet uneventful last years of his master and witnessed his
death, which occurred at his home near Nashville, Tennessee. After the
master had been placed under the sod, Uncle Sammy was seen each day
visiting Jackson's grave.

"Do you think President Jackson is in heaven?" an acquaintance asked
Uncle Sammy.

"If-n he wanted to go dar, he dar now," said the old man. "If-n Mars
Andy wanted to do any thing all Hell couldn't keep him from doin' it."

Dr. Buckner believes each Negro is confident that he will take himself
with all his peculiarities to the land of promise. Each physical feature
and habitual idiosyncrasy will abide in his redeemed personality. Old
Joe will be there in person with the wrinkle crossing the bridge of his
nose and little stephen will wear his wool pulled back from his eyes and
each will recognize his fellow man. "What fools we all are," declared
Dr. Buckner.

Asked his views concerning the different books embraced in the Holy
Bible, Dr. Buckner, who is a student of the Bible said, "I believe
almost every story in the Bible is an allegory, composed to illustrate
some fundemental truth that could otherwise never have been clearly
presented only through the medium of an allegory."

"The most treacherous impulse of the human nature and the one to be most
dreaded is jealousy." With these words the aged Negro doctor launched
into the expression of his political views. "I'm a Democrat." He then
explained how he voted for the man but had confidence that his chosen
party possesses ability in choosing proper candidates. He is an ardent
follower of Franklin D. Roosevelt and speaks of Woodrow Wilson with
bated breath.

Through the influence of John W. Boehne, Sr., and the friendly advice of
other influential citizens of Evansville Dr. Buckner was appointed
minister to Liberia, on Woodrow Wilson's cabinet, in the year 1913. Dr.
Buckner appreciated the confidence of his friends in appointing him and
cherishes the experineces gained while abroad. He noted the expressions
of gratitude toward cabinet members by the citizens of that African
coast. One Albino youth brought an offering of luscious mangoes and
desired to see the minister from the United States of America. Some
natives presented palm oils. "The natives have been made to understand
that the United States has given aid to Liberia in a financial way and
the customs-service of the republic is temporarily administered headed
by an American." "A thoroughly civilized Negro state does not exist in
Liberia nor do I believe in any part of West Africa. Superstition is the
interpretation of their religion, their political views are a hodgepodge
of unconnected ideas. Strength over rules knowledge and jealousy crowds
out almost all hope of sympathetic achievement and adjustment." Dr.
Buckner recounted incidents where jealousy was apparent in the behavior
of men and women of higher civilizations than the African natives. While
voyaging to Spain on board a Spanish vessel, he witnessed a very
refined, polite Jewish woman being reduced to tears by the taunts of a
Spanish officer, on account of her nationality. "Jealousy," he said,
"protrudes itself into politics, religion and prevents educational
achievement."

During a political campaign I was compelled to pay a robust Negro man to
follow me about my professional visits and my social evenings with my
friends and family, to prevent meeting physical violence to myself or
family when political factions were virtually at war within the area of
Evansville. The influence of political captains had brought about the
dreadful condition and ignorant Negroes responded to their political
graft, without realizing who had befriended them in need."

"The negro youths are especially subject to propoganda of the
four-flusher for their home influence is, to say the least, negative.
Their opportunities limited, their education neglected and they are
easily aroused by the meddling influence of the vote-getter and the
traitor. I would to God that their eyes might be opened to the light."

Dr. Buckner's influence is mostly exhibited in the sick room, where his
presence is introduced in the effort to relieve pain.

The gradual rise from slavery to prominence, the many trials encountered
along the road has ripened the always sympathetic nature of Dr. Buckner
into a responsive suffer among a suffering people. He has hope that
proper influences and sympathetic advice will mould the plastic
character of the Afro-American youths of the United States into proper
citizens and that their immortal souls inherit the promised reward of
the redeemed through grace.

"Receivers of emancipation from slavery and enjoyers of emancipation
from sin through the sacrifice of Abraham Lincoln and Jesus Christ; Why
should not the negroes be exalted and happy?" are the words of Dr.
Buckner.


Note: G.W. Buckner was born December 1st, 1852. The negroes in Kentucky
expressed it, "In fox huntin' time" one brother was born in "Simmon
time", one in "Sweet tater time," and another in "Plantin' time."

--Negro lore.
