



Seated in a comfortable chair in the living room of her home, Julia
Bunch, Negress of 85 years, presented a picture of the old South that
will soon pass away forever. The little 3-room house, approachable only
on foot, was situated on top of a hill. Around the clean-swept yard,
petunias, verbena, and other flowers were supplemented by a large patch
of old-fashioned ribbon grass. A little black and white kitten was
frisking about and a big red hen lazily scratched under a big shade tree
in search of food for her brood. Julia's daughter, who was washing
"white people's clothes" around the side of the house, invited us into
the living room where her mother was seated.

The floors of the front porch and the living room were scrubbed
spotlessly clean. There was a rug on the floor, while a piano across one
corner, a chifforobe with mirrored doors, a bureau, and several
comfortable chairs completed the room's furnishings. A motley assortment
of pictures adorning the walls included: _The Virgin Mother_, _The
Sacred Bleeding Heart_, several large family photographs, two pictures
of the Dionne Quintuplets, and one of President Roosevelt.

Julia was not very talkative, but had a shy, irresistible chuckle, and
it was this, together with her personal appearance and the tidiness of
her home that left an indelible impression on the minds of her visitors.
Her skin was very dark, and her head closely wrapped in a dark bandana,
from which this gray hair peeped at intervals forming a frame for her
face. She was clad in a black and white flowered print dress and a dark
gray sweater, from which a white ruffle was apparent at the neck. Only
two buttons of the sweater were fastened and it fell away at the waist
displaying her green striped apron. From beneath the long dress, her
feet were visible encased in men's black shoes laced with white strings.
Her ornaments consisted of a ring on her third finger, earrings, and
tortoise-rimmed glasses which plainly displayed their dime-store origin.

"I b'longed to Marse Jackie Dorn of Edgefield County, I was gived to him
and his wife when dey was married for a weddin' gift. I nussed deir
three chilluns for 'em and slep' on a couch in dier bedroom 'til I was
12 years old, den 'Mancipation come. I loved 'em so and stayed wid 'em
for four years atter freedom and when I left 'em I cried and dem
chilluns cried.

"Yassir, dey was sho' good white people and very rich. Dere warn't
nothin' lackin' on dat plantation. De big house was part wood and part
brick, and de Niggers lived in one or two room box houses built in rows.
Marse Jackie runned a big grist mill and done de grindin' for all de
neighbors 'round 'bout. Three or four Niggers wukked in de mill all de
time. Us runned a big farm and dairy too.

"Dere was allus plenty t'eat 'cause Marster had a 2-acre gyarden and a
big fruit orchard. Two cooks was in de kitchen all de time. Dey cooked
in a big fireplace, but us had big ovens to cook de meat, biscuits and
lightbread in. Us made 'lasses and syrup and put up fruits just lak dey
does now.

"My Ma was head weaver. It tuk two or three days to set up de loom
'cause dere was so many little bitty threads to be threaded up. Us had
dyes of evvy color. Yassir, us could make wool cloth too. De sheeps was
sheered once a year and de wool was manufactured up and us had a loom
wid wheels to spin it into thread.

"Old Marster never whupped nobody and dere was only one man dat I kin
'member dat de overseer whupped much and he 'served it 'cause he would
run away in spite of evvything. Dey would tie him to a tree way down in
de orchard and whup him."

Julia kept repeating and seemed anxious to impress upon the minds of her
visitors that her white folks were good and very rich. "Yassir, my white
folks had lots of company and visited a lot. Dey rode saddle horses and
had deir own carriages wid a high seat for de driver. Nosir, she didn't
ride wid hoopskirts--you couldn't ride wid dem on.

"Us bought some shoes from de market but dere was a travelin' shoemaker
dat wukked by days for all de folks. He was a slave and didn't git no
money; it was paid to his Marster. Us had our own blacksmith dat wukked
all de time.

"De slaves from all de plantations 'round come to our corn shuckin's. Us
had 'em down in de orchard. Lots of white folks comed too. Dey kilt hogs
and us had a big supper and den us danced. Nosir, dere warn't no toddy,
Marse didn't b'lieve in dat, but dey would beat up apples and us drinked
de juice. It sho' was sweet too.

"Folks done dey travelin' in stages and hacks in dem days. Each of de
stages had four hosses to 'em. When de cotton and all de other things
was ready to go to market, dey would pack 'em and bring 'em to Augusta
wid mules and wagons. It would take a week and sometimes longer for de
trip, and dey would come back loaded down wid 'visions and clothes, and
dere was allus a plenty for all de Niggers too.

"De white folks allus helped deir Niggers wid de weddin's and buyed deir
clothes for 'em. I 'members once a man friend of mine come to ax could
he marry one of our gals. Marster axed him a right smart of questions
and den he told him he could have her, but he mustn't knock or cuff her
'bout when he didn't want her no more, but to turn her loose.

"Us had a big cemetery on our place and de white folks allus let deir
Niggers come to de fun'rals. De white folks had deir own sep'rate
buryin' ground, but all de coffins was home-made. Even de ones for de
settlement peoples was made right in our shop. Yassum, dey sung at de
fun'rals and you wants me to sing. I can't sing, but I'll try a little
bit." Then with a beautiful and peculiar rhythm only attained by the
southern Negro, she chanted:

  'Come-ye-dat-love-de-Lord
   And-let-your-joys-be-known.'

"A rooster crowin' outside your door means company's comin' and a
squinch owl means sho' death. Dose are all de signs I kin 'member and I
don't 'member nothin' 'bout slavery remedies.

"Yassir, dey useter give us a nickel or 10 cents sometimes so us could
buy candy from de store." Asked if she remembered patterollers she gave
her sly chuckle and said: "I sho' does. One time dey come to our house
to hunt for some strange Niggers. Dey didn't find 'em but I was so
skeered I hid de whole time dey was dar. Yassir, de Ku Kluxers raised
cain 'round dar too.

"I 'members de day well when Marster told us us was free. I was glad and
didn't know what I was glad 'bout. Den 'bout 200 Yankee soldiers come
and dey played music right dar by de roadside. Dat was de fust drum and
fife music I ever heared. Lots of de Niggers followed 'em on off wid
just what dey had on. None of our Niggers went and lots of 'em stayed
right on atter freedom.

"Four years atter dat, I left Edgefield and come here wid my old man. Us
had six chilluns. My old man died six years ago right dar 'cross de road
and I'se livin' here wid my daughter. I can't wuk no more. I tried to
hoe a little out dar in de field last year and I fell down and I hasn't
tried no more since.

"I went once not so long ago to see my white folkses. Dey gived me a
dollar to spend for myself and I went 'cross de street and buyed me some
snuff--de fust I had had for a long time. Dey wanted to know if I had
ever got de old age pension and said dat if I had been close to dem I
would have had it 'fore now."
