"I was born three miles west of Starkville, Mississippi on a pretty
tolerable large farm. My folks was bought from a speculator drove come
by. They come from Sanders in South Ca'lina. Master Charlie Cannon
bought a whole drove of us, both my grandparents on both sides. He had
five farms, big size farms. Saturday was ration day.

"Our master built us a church in our quarters and sont his preacher to
preach to us. He was a white preacher. Said he wanted his slaves to be
Christians.

"I never went to school in my life. I was taught by the fireside to be
obedient and not steal.

"We et outer trays hewed out of logs. Three of us would eat together. We
had wooden spoons the boys made whittling about in cold rainy weather.
We all had gourds to drink outer. When we had milk we'd get on our knees
and turn up the tray, same way wid pot-liquor. They give the grown up
the meat and us pot-liquor.

"Pa was a blacksmith. He got a little work from other plantations. The
third year of the surrender he bought us a cow. The master was dead. He
never went to war. He went in the black jack thickets. His sons wasn't
old enough to go to war. Pa seemed to like ole master. The overseer was
white looking like the master but I don't know if he was white man or
nigger. Ole master wouldn't let him whoop much as he pleased. Master
held him off on whooping.

"When the master come to the quarters us children line up and sit and
look at him. When he'd go on off we'd hike out and play. He didn't care
if we look at him.

"My pa was light about my color. Ma was dark. I heard them say she was
part Creek (Indian).

"Folks was modester before the children than they are now. The children
was sent to play or git a bucket cool water from the spring. Everything
we said wasn't smart like what children say now. We was seen and not
heard. Not seen too much or somebody be stepping 'side to pick up a
brush to nettle our legs. Then we'd run and holler both.

"Now and then a book come about and it was hid. Better not be caught
looking at books.

"Times wasn't bad 'ceptin' them speculator droves and way they got
worked too hard and frailed. Some folks was treated very good, some
killed.

"Folks getting mean now. They living in hopes and lazing about. They
work some."
