


"I lives here by myself cause my husband been dead three years. Moved
here fore my chillun went to de war. I go to work en buy dis here home
en get whe' I can' pay tax en people tell me not to move. Say, rent me
bed en catch me a dollar, if it ain' a sin to rent your bed for a
dollar. One of de big officers of de town tell me dat last week en he
die next day. Government take my house en when dey carry sick peoples
from de jail, dey bring em here fore dey die. It ain' but one night
journey. Ain' gwine let dem be live enough to run away. Ain' got no kin
to leave de house to en dey tell me stay on here. Dey say I work so hard
to get dis house dat dey ain' gwine make me leave here."

(Aunt Sylvia has a sign in her front yard. It seems she took the frame
of a large picture and inserted a piece of pasteboard into it. She
explained that this sign is a warning to evil doers not to molest her.
She says that they must not come past this sign. The words on the sign
are somewhat illegibly written. The interviewers were able to make out
these words: "This is a house of the Lord. Don't go pass. This is a
house of the Lord...." Sign is dated March 1, 1937).

"I don' know how old I is, but I remembers I was 8 years old when
freedom come. I born down dere in de Effingham section on Mr. Gregg
plantation. My half-sister say I must always remember de Christmas day
cause dat de day I was born. Father en mother belong to de old Bill
Greggs en dat whe' Miss Earlie Hatchel buy me from. After dat, I didn'
never live wid my parents any more, but I went back to see dem every two
weeks. Got a note en go on a Sunday evenin en come back to Miss Hatchel
on Monday. Miss Hatchel want a nurse en dat how-come she buy me. I
remembers Miss Hatchel puttin de baby in my lap en tell me don' drop
him. Didn' have to do no work much in dem days, but dey didn' allow me
to play none neither. When de baby sleep, I sweep de yard en work de
garden en pick seed out de cotton to spin. Nursed little while for Miss
Hatchel en den get free."

"I see em sell plenty colored peoples away in dem days cause dat de way
white folks made heap of dey money. Coase dey ain' never tell us how
much dey sell em for. Just stand em up on a block bout three feet high
en a speculator bid em off just like dey was horses. Dem what was bid
off didn' never say nothin neither. Don' know who bought my brothers,
George en Earl. (She cried after this statement). I see em sell some
slaves twice fore I was sold en I see de slaves when dey be travelin
like hogs to Darlington. Some of dem be women folks lookin like dey
gwine to get down dey so heavy."

"We fare good in dat day en time. Everybody round dere fare good. My
Massa always was good to his slaves cause all de colored people say he
was good man to us. Dey never whip me in all my life. Tell me if I don'
know how to do anything to tell dem en dey show me how. I remembers Miss
Hatchel caught en shook me one time en when I tell her husband, he tell
her to keep his hands off his little Nigger. Dey all was good to me.
When I start home to see my mamma, dey cry after me till I come back.
Many a time my Missus go work in de field en let me mind de chillun."

"We live in de quarter bout ½ mile from de white folks house in a one
room pole house what was daubed wid dirt. Dere was bout 20 other colored
people house dere in de quarter dat was close together en far apart too.
De ground been us floor en us fireplace been down on de ground. Take
sticks en make chimney cause dere won' no bricks en won' no saw mills to
make lumber when I come along. Oh, my white folks live in a pole house
daubed wid dirt too. Us just had some kind of home-made bedstead wid
pine straw bed what to sleep on in dem days. Sew croaker sack together
en stuff em wid pine straw. Dat how dey make dey mattress. Didn' get
much clothes to wear in dat day en time neither. Man never wear no
breeches in de summer. Go in his shirt tail dat come down to de knees en
a 'oman been glad enough to get one piece homespun frock what was made
wid dey hand. Make petticoat out of old dress en patch en patch till
couldn' tell which place weave. Always put wash out on a Saturday night
en dry it en put it back on Sunday. Den get oak leaves en make a hat
what to wear to church. We didn' never have but one pair of shoes a year
en dey was dese here brogans wid thick soles en brass toes. Had shop
dere on de plantation whe' white man made all de shoes en plows. Dey
would save all de cowhide en soak it in salt two or three weeks to get
de hair off it en dey have big trough hewed out whe' dey clean it after
dey get de hair off it. After dat, it was turn to de man at de shop."

"I remembers when night come on en we go back to de quarter, we cook
bread in de ashes en pick seed from de cotton en my mamma set dere en
sew heap of de time. Den I see em when dey have dem hay pullings. Dey
tote torch to gather de hay by en after dey pull two or three stacks of
hay, dey have a big supper en dance in de road en beat sticks en blow
cane. Had to strike fire on cotton wid two rocks cause dey didn' have no
match in dem days."

"I tellin you my Missus sho was good to me in dat day en time. She been
so good to me dat I stay dere wid her 20 year after I got free. Stay
dere till I marry de old man Isenia Cannon. You see my old Massa got
killed in de war. She tell me I better stay whe' I can get flour bread
to eat cause she make her own flour en bake plenty biscuit in de oven.
Den she kill hogs en a cow every Christmas en give us all de egg-nog en
liquor we want dat day. Dig hole in de ground en roast cow over log
fire. When I get hard up for meat en couldn' get nothin else, I catch
rabbits en birds. Make a death trap wid a lid en bait it wid cabbage en
corn en catch em dat way. Den another time, I dig deep hole in de ground
en dob it wid clay en fill it up wid water. Rabbits hunt water in de
night en fall in dere en drown. I used to set traps heap of times to
keep de rabbits from eatin up de people gardens. Folks eat all kind of
things durin de war. Eat honeysuckle off de low sweet bush after de
flower falls off en pine mass dat dey get out de burr en sour weeds.
Wouldn' nobody eat dem things dese days. Coase dey let de slaves have
three acres of land to a family to plant for dey garden. Work dem in
moonlight nights en on a Saturday evenin."

"Oh, yes, dey have white overseers den. I hear some people say dey was
good people. At night de overseer would walk out to see could he catch
any of us walkin widout a note en to dis day, I don' want to go nowhe'
widout a paper. It just like dis, de overseer didn' have to be right
behind you to see dat you work in dem days. Dey have all de fields name
en de overseer just had to call on de horn en tell you what field to go
work in dat day. Den he come along on a Saturday evenin to see what you
done. If you ain' do what he say do, he put de Nigger dog on you en he
run you all night till he find you. No matter whe' you hide, he find
you en hold you till de overseer get dere. Bite you up if dey get reach
of you. When de overseer come, he carry you to de stables en whip you.
Dey dat ain' never got no whipping, you can' do nothin wid dem dese
days."

"I got Miss Hatchel horn bout here now dat been through nearly 100 head
of people. If you talk on it, dere de 100 head of automobiles to see
what it is. I sold old Massa's sword last week for ten cents, but I ain'
gwine do away wid his old horn. (4 ft. long, 15 in. cross big end 1 in.
from top end. Mouth piece is gone. Catch about 15 in. from top). Can
talk to anybody 15 to 16 miles away en dat how-come I don' want to sell
it cause if anything happen, I can call people to come. Dis horn ain' no
tin, it silver. It de old time phone. Got old Massa maul too en dis here
Grandpa oxen bit dat was made at home."

"De white folks didn' never help none of we black people to read en
write no time. Dey learn de yellow chillun, but if dey catch we black
chillun wid a book, dey nearly bout kill us. Dey was sho better to dem
yellow chillun den de black chillun dat be on de plantation. Northern
women come dere after de war, but dey didn' let em teach nobody nothin."

"I go to church wid my white folks, but dey never have no church like
dey have dese days. De bush was dey shelter en when it rain, dey meet
round from one house to another. Ride to church in de ox cart cause I
had to carry de baby everywhe' I go. White folks didn' have no horse
den. De peoples sho been blessed wid more religion in dem days den dese
days. Didn' never have to lock up nothin den en if you tell a story, you
get a whippin. Now de peoples tell me to tell a story. I been cleanin up
a lady porch en she tell me to tell anybody what come dere dat she ain'
home. A lady come en ax fer her en I tell her she say anybody come here,
tell em I ain' home. If you don' believe she here, look in de bedroom.
Miss Willcox come out dere en beat me in de back. I tell her don' read
de Bible en tell me to tell a story. I ain' gwine tell no story cause my
white folks learnt me not to do dat. I knows people was better in dem
times den dey is now. Dey teach you how you ought to treat your neighbor
en never hear no bad stories nowhe'. Massa en Missus taught me to say a
prayer dat go like dis:

  "De angels in Heaven love us,
  Bless mamma en bless papa,
  Bless our Missus,
  Bless de man dat feedin us,
  For Christ sake."

"De peoples use herb medicines for dey cures in dem days dat dey get out
de woods. I make a herb medicine dat good for anything out de roots of
three herbs mix together. Couldn' tell you how I make it cause dat
would ruin me. Town people try to buy de remedy from me, but Dr. McLeod
tell me not to sell it. Dey offer me $1500.00 for it, but I never take
it."

"You want my mind, my heart, de truth en I gwine tell you it just like I
see it. Since de colored peoples got de law, dey get in all kind of
devilment. Dat how-come if I had to go back, I would go back to slavery
en stay wid my white folks."

  Source: Sylvia Cannon, ex-slave, age 85, Florence. S. C.

  Personal interview by H. Grady Davis and Mrs.
  Lucile Young, and written up in question and
  answer form. Rewritten in story form by Annie Ruth
  Davis.


  FUNERAL SONG

  Star in de east en star in de west,
  I wish de star was in my breast.
  Mother is home, sweet home,
  Mother is home, sweet home,
  Want to join de angel here.
  What a blessed home, sweet home,
  What a blessed home, sweet home,
  Want to join de angel here.

(You can sing bout father, brother, sister en all.)

  Sylvia Cannon,

  Ex-Slave, age 85,
  May 21, 1937,
  Florence, S. C.


  FUNERAL SONG

  Come ye dat love de Lord,
  En let your joys be known.
  Hark from de tomb,
  En hear my tender voice.
  By de grace of God I'll meet you
  On Canaan Happy Shore.
  Oh, mother, where will I meet you on Canaan Happy Shore?
  En by de grace of God I'll meet you on Canaan Happy Shore.

(Shaking hands, marching around grave. White en Colored marched from
church to graveyard. Old people in de ox cart en young people walking.
Didn' have coffins like dey do now. Build de coffin en black it wid
smut. Blacksmith make de nails. Could see in de box.)

  Sylvia Cannon,
  Ex-Slave, age 85,
  May 21, 1937,
  Florence, S. C.
