"I was born in West Point, Mississippi. My folks' owners was Master
Harris and Liddie Harris. My parent's name was Sely Sikes. She was
mother of seven children. Papa was name Owen Sikes. He never was
whooped. They had different owners. Both my grandparents was dead on
both sides. I never seen them.

"Mama said her owners wasn't good. Her riding boss put a scar on her
back she took to her grave. It was deep and a foot long. He wanted to
whoop her naked. He had the colored men hold her and he whooped her. She
run off and when her owner come home she come to him at his house and
told him all about it. She had been in the woods about a week she
reckon. She had a baby she had left. The old mistress done had it
brought to her. She was nursing it. She had a sicking baby of her own.
She kept that baby. Mama said her breast was way out and the doctor had
to come wait on her; it nearly ruined.

"Mama said her master was so mad he cursed the overseer, paid him, and
give him ten minutes to leave his place. He left in a hurry. That was
her very first baby. She was raising a family, so they put her a nurse
at the house. She had been ploughing. She had big fine children. They
was proud of them. She raised a big family. She took care of all her and
Miss Liddie's babies and washed their hippins. Never no soap went on
them she said reason she had that to do. Another woman cooked and
another woman washed.

"Mama said she was sold once, away from her mother but they let her have
her four children. She grieved for her old mama, 'fraid she would have a
hard time. She sold for one thousand dollars. She said that was half
price but freedom was coming on. She never laid eyes on her mama ag'in.

"After freedom they had gone to another place and the man owned the
place run the Ku Klux off. They come there and he told them to go on
away, if he need them he would call them back out there. They never came
back, she said. They was scared to death of the Ku Klux. At the place
where they was freed all the farm bells rung slow for freedom. That was
for miles about. Their master told them up at his house. He said it was
sad thing, no time for happiness, they hadn't 'sperienced it. But for
them to come back he would divide long as what he had lasted. They
didn't go off right at first. They was several years getting broke up.
Some went, some stayed, some actually moved back. Like bees trying to
find a setting place. Seem like they couldn't get to be satisfied even
being free.

"I had eleven children my own self. I let the plough fly back and hit me
once and now I got a tumor there. I love to plough. I got two children
living. She comes to see me. She lives across over here. I don't hear
from my boy. I reckon he living. I gets help from the relief on account
I can't work much with this tumor."


