_DE YANKS DRAPPED OUTEN DE SKY_

'Aunt’ Hattie Clayton said, "I’se gittin’ erroun’ de ninety notch,
honey, an’ I reckon de Kingdom ain’t fur away."

She lives in a tiny cabin not far from Opelika. Her shoulders are bent;
her hair gray, but she still does a large amount of housework. She likes
to sit on the tumbledown front porch on summer afternoons, plying her
knitting needles and stretching her aged legs in the warm sunlight.

"’Twas a long time ago, honey," she observed when talk of slavery days
was brought up, "but I ’members as ef ’twas yestidy. My ol’ mistus was
de Widder Day. She owned a plantation clos’t to Lafayette an’ she was
mighty good to us niggers.

"Ol’ Mistus boughten me when I was jus’ a little tyke, so I don’t
'member ’bout my pappy an’ mammy.

"Honey, I ’members dat us little chilluns didn’t go to de fiel’s twel us
was big ’nuff to keep up a row. De oberseer, Marse Joe Harris, made us
work, but he was good to us. Ol’ Mistus, she wouldn’t let us wuk whin it
was rainin’ an’ cold."

Asked about pleasures of the old plantation life, she chuckled and
recalled:

"I kin heah de banjers yit. Law me, us had a good time in dem days. Us
danced most eb’ry Sattidy night an’ us made de rafters shake wid us
foots. Lots o’ times Ole Missus would come to de dances an’ look on. An’
whin er brash nigger boy cut a cute bunch uv steps, de menfolks would
give ’im a dime or so.

"Honey, us went t’ de church on a Sundays. I allus did lak singin’ and I
loved de ol’ songs lak, ’Ol’ Ship of Zion,’ an’ ’Happy Land.’ Ol’ Mistus
useter take all de little scamps dat was too little for church an’ read
de Book to dem under de big oak tree in de front yahd."

"Aunt Hattie," she was asked, "do you remember anything about the War
between the States?"

"You mean de Yankees, honey?"

"Yes, the Yankees."

Her coal black face clouded.

"Dey skeered us nearly to death," she began. "Dey drap right outen de
sky. Ol’ Mistus keep hearin’ dey was comin’, but dey didn’t nebber show
up. Den, all ter once, dey was swarmin’ all ober de place wid deir blue
coats a-shinin’ an’ deir horses a’rarin’.

"Us chilluns run en hid in de fence corners en’ behin’ quilts dat was
hangin’ on de line. An’ honey, dem Yankees rid deir horses rat onto Ol’
Mistus flower beds. Dey hunted de silver, too, but us done hid dat.

"I ’members dey was mad. Dey sot de house a-fire an’ tuk all de vittals
dey could fin’. I run away an’ got los’, an’ whin I come back all de
folks was gone."

'Aunt’ Hattie said she "wint down de big road an’ come to a lady’s house
where she remained until she married.

"Us moved to Lafayette an’ den to Opelika," she concluded, "an’ I bin’
here eber since."

She lives with one of her numerous granddaughters now. She finds her
great happiness in "de promise" and the moments when she can sit in the
shade and dip her mind back into memory.



