[HW: Whipped from Sunup to Sundown]

"I was born in Hempstead County, between Nashville and Greenville, in
Arkansas, on the Military Road. Never been outside the state in my life.
I was born ninety years ago. I been here in Pulaski County nearly
fifty-seven years.

"I was born in a old double log house chinked and dobbed. Nary a window
and one door. I had a bedstead made with saw and ax. Chairs were made
with saw, ax, and draw knife. My brother Orange made the furniture. We
kept the food in boxes.

"My mother's name was Mandy Bishop, and my father's name was Jerry
Bishop. I don't know who my grand folks were. They was all Virginia
folks--that is all I know. They come from Virginia, so they told me. My
old master was Harmon Bishop and when they divided the property I fell
to Miss Evelyn Bishop.


Age

"The first man that came through here writing us up for the Red Cross, I
give him my age as near as I could. And they kept that. You know peace
was declared in 1865. They told me I was free. I got scared and thought
that the speculators were going to put me in them big droves and sell me
down in Louisiana. My old mistress said, 'You fool, you are free. We are
going to take you to your mammy.' I cried because I thought they was
carrying me to see my mother before they would send me to be sold in
Louisiana. My old mistress said she would whip me. But she didn't. When
we got to my mother's, I said, 'How old is I?' She said, 'You are
sixteen.' She didn't say months, she didn't say years, she didn't say
weeks, she didn't say days; she just said, 'You are sixteen.' And my
case worker told me that made me ninety years old.

"I was in Hempstead County on Harmon Bishop's plantation. It was Miss
Polly, Harmon's wife, that told me I was free, and give me my age.

"I know freedom come before 1865, because my brothers would tell me to
come home from Nashville where I would be sent to do nursing by my old
mistress and master too to nurse for my young mistress.

"When my old master's property was divided, I don't know why--he wasn't
dead nor nothin'--I fell to Miss Evelyn, but I stayed in Nashville
working for Miss Jennie Nelson, one of Harmon's daughters. Miss Jennie
was my young mistress. My brothers were already free. I don't know how
Miss Polly came to tell me I was free. But my brothers would see me and
tell me to run away and come on home and they would protect me, but I
was afraid to try it. Finally Miss Polly found that she couldn't keep me
any longer and she come and told me I was free. But I thought that she
was fooling me and just wanted to sell me to the speculators.


Family

"My mother was the mother of twenty children and I am the mother of
eighteen. My youngest is forty-five. I don't know whether any of my
mother's children is living now or not. I left them that didn't join the
militia in Hempstead County fifty-seven years ago. Them that joined the
militia went off. I don't know nothin' about them. I have two girls
living that I know about. I had two boys went to France and I never
heard nothin' 'bout what happened to them. Nothing--not a word. Red
Cross has hunted 'em. Police Mitchell hunted 'em--police Mitchell in
Little Rock. But I ain't heard nothin' 'bout 'em.


Work

"The first work I did was nursing and after that I was water toter. I
reckon I was about seven or eight years old when I first began to nurse.
I could barely lift the baby. I would have to drag them 'round. Then I
toted water to the field. Then when I was put to plowing, and chopping
cotton, I don't know exactly how old I was. But I know I was a young
girl and it was a good while before the War. I had to do anything that
come up--thrashing wheat, sawing logs, with a wristband on, lifting
logs, splitting rails. Women in them days wasn't tender like they is
now. They would call on you to work like men and you better work too. My
mother and father were both field hands.


Soldiers

"Oo-oo-oo-ee-ee-ee!! Man, the soldiers would pass our house at daylight,
two deep or four deep, and be passing it at sundown still marching
making it to the next stockade. Those were Yankees. They didn't set no
slaves free. When I knowed anything about freedom, it was the Bureaus.
We didn't know nothing like young folks do now.

"We hardly knowed our names. We was cussed for so many bitches and sons
of bitches and bloody bitches, and blood of bitches. We never heard our
names scarcely at all. First young man I went with wanted to know my
initials! What did I know 'bout initials? You ask 'em ten years old now,
and they'll tell you. That was after the War. Initials!!!


Slave Sales

"Have I seen slaves sold! Good God, man! I have seed them sold in
droves. I have worn a buck and gag in my mouth for three days for trying
to run away. I couldn't eat nor drink--couldn't even catch the slobber
that fell from my mouth and run down my chest till the flies settled on
it and blowed it. 'Scuse me but jus' look at these places. (She pulled
open her waist and showed scars where the maggots had eaten in--ed.)


Whippings

"I been whipped from sunup till sundown. Off and on, you know. They whip
me till they got tired and then they go and res' and come out and start
again. They kept a bowl filled with vinegar and salt and pepper settin'
nearby, and when they had whipped me till the blood come, they would
take the mop and sponge the cuts with this stuff so that they would hurt
more. They would whip me with the cowhide part of the time and with
birch sprouts the other part. There were splinters long as my finger
left in my back. A girl named Betty Jones come over and soaped the
splinters so that they would be softer and pulled them out. They didn't
whip me with a bull whip; they whipped me with a cowhide. They jus'
whipped me 'cause they could--'cause they had the privilege. It wasn't
nothin' I done; they just whipped me. My married young master, Joe, and
his wife, Jennie, they was the ones that did the whipping. But I
belonged to Miss Evelyn.

"They had so many babies 'round there I couldn't keep up with all of
them. I was jus' a young girl and I couldn't keep track of all them
chilen. While I was turned to one, the other would get off. When I
looked for that one, another would be gone. Then they would whip me all
day for it. They would whip you for anything and wouldn't give you a
bite of meat to eat to save your life, but they'd grease your mouth when
company come.


Food

"We et out of a trough with a wooden spoon. Mush and milk. Cedar trough
and long-handled cedar spoons. Didn't know what meat was. Never got a
taste of egg. Oo-ee! Weren't allowed to look at a biscuit. They used to
make citrons. They were good too. When the little white chilen would be
comin' home from school, we'd run to meet them. They would say, 'Whose
nigger are you?' And we would say, 'Yor'n!' And they would say, 'No, you
ain't.' They would open those lunch baskets and show us all that good
stuff they'd brought back. Hold it out and snatch it back! Finally,
they'd give it to us, after they got tired of playing.


Health

"They're burying old Brother Jim Mullen over here today. He was an old
man. They buried one here last Sunday--eighty some odd. Brother Mullen
had been sick for thirty years. Died settin' up--settin' up in a chair.
The old folks is dyin' fas'. Brother Smith, the husband of the old lady
that brought you down here, he's in feeble health too. Ain't been well
for a long time.

"Look at that place on my head. (There was a knot as big as a hen
egg--smooth and shiny--ed.) When it first appeared, it was no bigger
then a pea, I scratched it and then the hair commenced to fall out. I
went to three doctors, and been to the clinic too. One doctor said it
was a busted vein. Another said it was a tumor. Another said it was a
wen. I know one thing. It don't hurt me. I can scratch it; I can rub it.
(She scratched and rubbed it while I flinched and my flesh crawled--ed.)
But it's got me so I can't see and hear good. Dr. Junkins, the best
doctor in the community told me not to let anybody cut on it. Dr. Hicks
wanted to take it off for fifty dollars. I told him he'd let it stay on
for nothin'. I never was sick in my life till a year ago. I used to
weigh two hundred ten pounds; now I weigh one hundred forty. I can lap
up enough skin on my legs to go 'round 'em twice.

"Since I was sick a year ago. I haven't been able to get 'round any. I
never been well since. The first Sunday in January this year, I got
worse settin' in the church. I can't hardly get 'round enough to wait on
myself. But with what I do and the neighbors' help, I gets along
somehow.


Present Condition

"If it weren't for the mercy of the people through here. I would suffer
for a drink of water. Somebody ran in on old lady Chairs and killed her
for her money. But they didn't get it, and we know who it was too.
Somebody born and raised right here 'mongst us. Since then I have been
'fraid to stay at home even.

"I had a fine five-room house and while I was down sick, my daughter
sold it and I didn't get but twenty-nine dollars out of it. She got the
money, but I never seed it. I jus' lives here in these rags and this
dirt and these old broken-down pieces of furniture. I've got fine
furniture that she keeps in her house.

"I get some help from the Welfare. They give me eight dollars. They give
me commodities too. They give me six at first, and they increased it. My
case worker said she would try to git me some more. God knows I need it.
I have to pay for everything I get. Have to pay a boy to go get water
for me. There's people that gits more 'n they need and have plenty time
to go fishin' but don't have no time to work. You see those boys there
goin' fishin'; but that's not their fault. One of the merchants in town
had them cut off from work because they didn't trade with him.

"You gets 'round lots, son, don't you? Well; if you see anybody that has
some old shoes they don't want, git 'em to give 'em to me. I don't care
whether they are men's shoes or women's shoes. Men's shoes are more
comfortable. I wear number sevens. I don't know what last. Can't you
tell? (I suppose that her shoes would be seven E--ed.) I can't live off
eight dollar. I have to eat, git help with my washing, pay a child to go
for my water, 'n everything. I got these dresses give to me. They too
small, and I got 'em laid out to be let out.

"You just come in any time; I can't talk to you like I would a woman;
but I guess you can understand me."


Interviewer's Comment

Sallie Crane lives near the highway between Sweet Home and Wrightsville.
Wrightsville post office, Lucinda Hays' box. McLain Birch, 1711 Wolfe
Street, Little Rock, knows the way to her house.

Her age is not less than ninety, because she hoed cotton and plowed
before the War. If anything, it is more than the ninety which she
claims. Those who know her well say she must be at least ninety-five.

She has a good memory although she complains of her health. She seems to
be pretty well dependent on herself and the Welfare and is asking for
old clothes and shoes as you will note by the story.
