


"Aunt Lucy is a tall well-built old woman who looks younger than her
years. She delights in talking, and was glad to tell what she knew about
the olden times.

"I don't know how old I been when de war end. If I been in de world I
wasn't old enough to pick up nuthin'. Miss Lulie Bowers say I'll be 78
first of March coming. Miss Lulie was my 'young Missus'. I love Miss
Lulie, and I thinks she thinks a heap of me--my young Missus, and her
father, my young Massa. He good to his darkies. He was a rich man--even
after de war. Miss Lulie say she was de only young lady that could go
off to college after de war. Miss Lulie help me powerful. She give me
shoes, and beddin. She and me grow up together. She is in de bed sick
now. I jes' come from dere. Had de doctor to see her.

"I hear 'em tell 'bout how de soldiers burn 'em out. My mother would
tell me. My father had gone off to fight. Say dey'd tie de hams an' de
things on de saddle--and burn de expensive houses. White folks jes' had
to hide everything. She talk 'bout all de men was gone and de women had
to pile up, four or five in one house to protect deyselves. My father
say when dey been 'rough-few-gieing' (refugeeing) de Beaufort Bridge
been burn down. He say he been so hungry one time he stop to a old
lady's house and ask her for something to eat. She say she didn't have
nothing but some dry bread. He take de bread, but he say it been so
hard, he threw some of it away. But he say he so hungry he wish he
hadn't throw it away. It was a hard time. Used to have to weave cloth
and dye thread. Had a loom to weave on and a spinning wheel. My
grandmother say de Yankees come to her house and take everything, but
she say one little pullet run out in de weeds and hide and de soldiers
couldn't find her. She say dat pullet lay and hatch and dat how dey got
start off again. Dey scramble and dey raise us some how or another.

"I had nine chillun for my first husband and one for my second husband.
I raise 'em all 'till dey grown; but all dead now 'cept three. My
husband died last year, I had to work for my chillun. But my second
husband, he help me wid 'em.

"Dat's all I kin tell you, Miss. I don't remember so much. Chillun in
those days weren't so bright as dey is now, you know."

  Source: Lucy Daniels, 78 ex-slave, Luray, S. C.
