WILLIAM DAVIS was born near Kingston, Tennessee, on the first of
     April, 1845. His family were the only slaves owned by Jonathan
     Draper, Baptist minister. In 1869 William joined the army and was
     stationed at Fort Stockton, Texas. He has lived in Houston since
     1870. William is active and takes a long, daily walk.


"Well, suh, jes' sit down in de chair yonder and I'll tell you what I
can 'bout times back yonder. Let's see, now. I was born on de first day
of April in 1845. De reason I knows was 'cause Miss Lizzie, our missy,
told me so when we was sot free. Mammy done told me I was born den, on
de Tennessee river, near Kingston. I heared her say de turnpike what run
past Massa John's house dere goes over de mountain to Bristol, over in
Virginny. Mammy and pappy and all us chillen 'long to de Drapers, Massa
Jonathan what us call Massa John, and he wife, Miss Lizzie, and we is de
only cullud folks what dey owns.

"Massa John am de Baptist preacher, and while I'm sho' glad to see my
folks sot free, I'll tell de truth and say Massa John and Miss Lizzie
was mighty good to us. Dey have four chillen; Massa Milton, what am
oldes' and kill in de first battle; Massa Bob and Massa George and Massa
Canero. Oh, yes, dey have one gal, Missy Ann.

"Course us didn't have no last names like now. Mammy named Sophie and
pappy named Billy. Sometimes de owners give de slaves last names
'cordin' to what dey do, like pappy was meat cook and mammy cook pies
and cakes and bread, so dey might have Cook for de last name.

"We has a bigger family dan Massa John, 'cause dey eight of us chillen.
I ain't seen none of dem since I lef' Virginny in 1869, but I 'member
all de names. Dere was Jane and Lucy and Ellen and Bob and Solomon and
Albert and John, and I'm de younges' de whole lot.

"I heared Miss Lizzie tell some white folks dat my mammy and pappy give
to her by her pappy in Alabama when she get married. Dat de custom with
rich folks den, and mammy 'long to de Ames, what was Miss Lizzie's name
'fore she marry. I heared her say when de stars falls, I think she say
in 1832, she was 'bout eighteen, and dey think de world am endin'.

"Pappy was a Indian. I knows dat. He came from Congo, over in Africa,
and I heared him say a big storm druv de ship somewhere on de Ca'lina
coast. I 'member he mighty 'spectful to Massa and Missy, but he proud,
too, and walk straighter'n anybody I ever seen. He had scars on de right
side he head and cheek what he say am tribe marks, but what dey means I
don't know.

"'Bout de first I 'members real good am where we am in Virginny and
Massa John runs de Washington College, in Washington County. I 'member
all de pupils eats at massa's house and dat de first job I ever had.
'Scuse me for laughin', but I don't reckon I thunk of dat since de Lawd
know when. Dat my first job. Dey has a string fasten to de wall on one
side de room, with pea fowl tail feathers strung 'long it, and it runs
most de length de room, above de dinin' table, and round a pulley-like
piece in de ceilin' with one end de string hangin' down. When mealtime
come, I am put where de string hang down and I pulls it easy like, and
de feathers swishes back and forth sideways, and keeps de flies from
lightin' while folks am eatin'. 'Ceptin' dat, all I does is play round
with Massa George and Missy Ann.

"Dey ain't no whuppin' on our place and on Sunday us all go to church,
and Massa John do de preachin'. Dey rides in de buggy and us follow in
de wagon. De white folks sets in front de church and us in back.

"I can't tell you how long us stay at de college, 'zactly, but us moves
to Warm Springs to take de baths and drink de water, in Scott County.
Dat two, three years befo' de war, and Massa John run de hotel and
preach on Sunday. I think dere am three springs, one sulphur water and
one lime water and one a warm spring. I does a little bit of everything
round de hotel, helps folks off de stage when it druv up, wait on table
and sich. When I hears de horn blow--you know, de stage driver blow it
when dey top de hill 'bout two miles 'way, to let you know dey comin'--I
sho' hustle round and git ready to meet it, 'cause most times folks what
I totes de grips for gives me something. Dat de first money I ever seed.
Some de folks gives me de picayune--dat what us call a nickel, now, and
some gives me two shillin's, what same as two-bits now. A penny was big
den, jes' like a two-bit piece, now.

"But when war begin 'tween de Yankees and de South, it sho' change
everything up, 'cause folks quit comin' to de Springs and de soldiers
takes over de place. Massa Milton go to jine de South Army and gits
kill. Morgan and he men make de Springs headquarters most de war, till
de Yankees come marchin' through toward de last part. I know pappy say
dem Yankees gwine win, 'cause dey allus marchin' to de South, but none
de South soldiers marches to de North. He didn't say dat to de white
folks, but he sho' say it to us. When de Yankees come marchin' through,
de Morgan soldiers jes' hide out till dey gone. Dey never done no
fightin' round Warm Springs. Lots of times dey goes way for couple weeks
and den comes back and rests awhile.

"Den one mornin'--I 'members it jes' like it yestiddy, it de fourth of
July in 1865--Miss Lizzie say to me, 'Willie, I wants you to git you
papa and de rest de family and have dem come to de porch right away.' I
scurries round quick like and tells dem and she comes out of de house
and says, 'Now, de Yankees done sot you free and you can do what you
wants, but you gwineter see more carpet baggers and liars dan you ever
has seed, and you'll be worse off den you ever has been, if you has
anythin' to do with dem. Den she opens de book and tells us all when us
born and how old us am, so us have some record 'bout ourselves. She
tells me I'm jes' nineteen and one fourth years old when I'm sot free.

"She tell pappy Massa John want to see him in de house and when he comes
out he tells us Massa John done told him to take a couple wagons and de
family and go to de farm 'bout ten miles 'way on Possum Creek and work
it and stay long as he wants. Massa has us load up one wagon with
'visions. Pappy made de first crop with jes' hoes, 'cause us didn't have
no hosses or mules to plow with. Us raise jes' corn and some wheat, but
dey am fruit trees, peaches and apples and pears and cherries. Massa
John pay pappy $120 de year, 'sides us 'visions, and us stays dere till
pappy dies in 1868.

"Den I heared 'bout de railroad what dey buildin' at Knoxville and I
leaves de folks and gits me de job totin' water. Dey asks my name and I
says William Davis, 'cause I knows Mr. Jefferson Davis am President of
de South durin' de war, and I figgers it a good name. In 1869 I goes to
Nashville and 'lists in de army. I'm in de 24th Infantry, Company G, and
us sent to Fort Stockton to guard de line of Texas, but all us do am
build 'dobe houses. Col. Wade was de commander de fort and Cap'n
Johnson was captain of G. Co. Out dere I votes for de first time, for
Gen. Grant, when Greeley and him run for president. But I gits sick at
de Fort and am muster out in 1870 and comes to Houston.

"I gits me de deckhand job on de Dinah, de steamboat what haul freight
and passengers 'tween Galveston and Houston. Den I works on de Lizzie,
what am a bigger boat. Course, Houston jes' a little bit of place to
what it am now--dey wasn't no git buildin's like dey is now, and mud, I
tell you de streets was jes' like de swamp when it rain.

"Long 'bout 1875 I gits marry to Mary Jones, but she died in 1883 and I
gits marry 'gain in 1885 to Arabelle Wilson and has four girls and one
boy from her. She died 'bout ten years back. Course, us cullud folks
marry jes' like white folks do now, but I seen cullud folks marry 'fore
de war and massa marry dem dis way: dey goes in de parlor and each carry
de broom. Dey lays de brooms on de floor and de woman put her broom
front de man and he put he broom front de woman. Dey face one 'nother
and step 'cross de brooms at de same time to each other and takes hold
of hands and dat marry dem. Dat's de way dey done, sho', 'cause I seed
my own sister marry dat way.

"I has wished lots of times to go back and see my folks, but I never has
been back and never seed dem since I left, and I guess dey am all gone
'long 'fore now. I has jobbed at first one thing and 'nother and like
pappy tells me, I has trials and tribulations and I has good chillen
what ain't never got in no trouble and what all helps take care dere old
pappy so I guess I ain't got no complainin' 'bout things.

"I dreams sometimes 'bout de peach trees and de pear trees and de cherry
trees and I'd give lots to see de mountains 'gain, 'cause when de frost
come, 'bout now, de leaves on de trees put on pretty colors and de
persimmons and nuts is ready for pickin' and a little later on us kill
de hawgs and put by de meat for de winter.

"De Lawd forgive me for dis foolishness, 'cause I got a good home, and
has all I need, but I gits to thinkin' 'bout Virginny sometimes and my
folks what I ain't seed since I left, and it sho' make me want to see it
once more 'fore I die.
