


Charlie Davis, now seventy-nine years old, was a small boy when the
slaves were freed. He lives alone in one room on Miller's Alley,
Columbia, S. C., and is healthy and physically capable of self-support.

"I has been wonderin' what you wanted to talk to dis old nigger 'bout
since I fust heard you wanted to see me. I takes it to be a honor for a
white gentleman to desire to have a conversation wid me. Well, here I
is, and I bet I's one of de blackest niggers you's seen for a season.
Somehow, I ain't 'shame of my color a-tall. If I forgits I is dark
complected, all I has to do is to look in a glass and in dere I sho'
don't see no white man.

"Boss, I is kinda glad I is a black man, 'cause you knows dere ain't
much expected of them nowhow and dat, by itself, takes a big and heavy
burden off deir shoulders. De white folks worries too much over dis and
over dat. They worries 'cause they ain't got no money and, when they
gits it, they worries agin 'cause they is 'fraid somebody is gwine to
steal it from them. Yes, sir, they frets and fumes 'cause they can't
'sociate wid big folks and, when they does go wid them, they is bothered
'cause they ain't got what de big folks has got.

"It ain't dat way wid most niggers. Nothin' disturbs them much, 'cept a
empty stomach and a cold place to sleep in. Give them bread to eat and
fire to warm by, then, hush your mouth; they is sho' safe then! De
'possum in his hollow, de squirrel in his nest, and de rabbit in his
bed, is at home. So, de nigger, in a tight house wid a big hot fire, in
winter, is at home, too.

"Some sort of ease and comfort is 'bout what all people, both white and
black, is strivin' for in dis world. All of us laks dat somethin' called
'tentment, in one way or de other. Many white folks and some darkies
thinks dat a pile of money, a fine house to live in, a 'spensive
'motorbile, fine clothes, and high 'ciety, is gwine to give them dat.
But, when they has all dis, they is still huntin' de end of de rainbow a
little ahead of them.

"Is de black man nervous or is he natchally scary? Well, sir, I is gwine
to say yes and no to dat. A nigger gits nervous when he hears somethin'
he don't understand and scared when he sees somethin' he can't make out.
When he gits sho' 'nough scared, he moves right then, not tomorrow. Lak
de wild animals of de woods, he ain't 'fraid of de dark, much, if he is
movin' 'bout, but when he stops, no house is too tight for him, in
summer or winter. If he sees a strange and curious sight at night, he
don't have to ask nobody what to do, 'cause he knows dat he has foots.
It is good-bye wid old clothes, bushes, and fences, when them foots gits
to 'tendin' to deir business. When you hears a funny and strange noise
and sees a curious and bad sight, I b'lieves you fust git nervous and
then dat feelin' grows stronger fas', 'til you git scared. I knows de
faster I moves, de slower I gits scared.

"From my age now, you can tell dat I was mighty little in slavery time.
All I knows 'bout them terrible times is what I has heard. I come pretty
close to them ticklish times, but I can't help from thinkin', even now,
dat I missed a 'sperience in slavery time dat would be doin' me good to
dis very day. Dere ain't no doubt dat many a slave learnt good lessons
dat showed them how to work and stay out of de jail or poorhouse, dat's
worth a little.

"I has heard my mammy say dat she b'long to de Wyricks dat has a big
plantation in de northwestern part of Fairfield County and dat my daddy
b'long to de Graddicks in de northern part of Richland County. Dese two
plantations was just across de road from each other. Mammy said dat de
patrollers was as thick as flies 'round dese plantations all de time,
and my daddy sho' had to slip 'round to see mammy. Sometime they would
ketch him and whip him good, pass or no pass.

"De patrollers was nothin' but poor white trash, mammy say, and if they
didn't whip some slaves, every now and then, they would lose deir jobs.
My mammy and daddy got married after freedom, 'cause they didn't git de
time for a weddin' befo'. They called deirselves man and wife a long
time befo' they was really married, and dat is de reason dat I's as old
as I is now. I reckon they was right, in de fust place, 'cause they
never did want nobody else 'cept each other, nohow. Here I is, I has
been married one time and at no time has I ever seen another woman I
wanted. My wife has been dead a long time and I is still livin' alone.
All our chillun is scattered 'bout over de world somewhere, and dat
somewhere is where I don't know. They ain't no help to me now, in my old
age. But, I reckon they ain't to be blamed much, 'cause they is young,
full of warm blood and thinks in a different way from de older ones.
Then, too, I 'spects they thinks deir old daddy would kinda be in deir
way, and de best thing for them to do is to stay away from me. I don't
know, it just seems lak de way of de world.

"I come from de Guinea family of niggers, and dat is de reason I is so
small and black. De Guinea nigger don't know nothin', 'cept hard work,
and, for him to be so he can keep up wid bigger folks, he has to turn
'round fas'. You knows dat if you puts a little hog in a pen wid big
hogs, de little one has got to move 'bout in a hurry amongst de big
ones, to git 'nough to eat, and de same way wid a little person, they
sho' has to hustle for what they gits. I has no head for learnin' what's
in books, and if I had, dere wasn't no schools for to learn dat head,
when I come 'long. I has made some money, 'long through de years, but
never knowed how to save it. Now I is so old dat I can't make much, and
so, I just live somehow, dat's all.

"President Roosevelt has done his best to help de old, poor, and
forgotten ones of us all, every color and race, while dis 'pression has
been gwine on in dis country. Is us gwine to git dis new pension what is
gwine 'bout, or is dat other somebody gwine to think he needs it worser
than us does? Dat's de question what 'sorbs my mind most, dese days. I
don't need much, and maybe I don't deserve nothin', but I sho' would lak
to git hold of dat little dat's 'tended for me by dat man up yonder in
Washington. (Roosevelt)

"Does I b'lieve in spirits and hants? My answer to dat question is dis:
'Must my tremblin' spirit fly into a world unknown?' When a person goes
'way from dis world, dere they is, and dere they is gwine to stay, 'til
judgment."
