"I'se now seventy-eight year old an' gwine on seventy-nine. I was borned
in de Tennessee Valley not far from Huntsville, Alabama. Right soon
atter I was borned my white folks, de Welborns, dey left Alabama an'
come right here to Phillips County, Arkansas, an' brung all the darkies
with 'em, an' that's how come me here till dis very day. I is been here
all de time since then an' been makin' crops er cotton an' corn every
since I been old enough. I is seen good times an' hard times, Boss, all
endurin' of those years followin' de War, but de worst times I is ever
seen hab been de last several years since de panic struck.

"How-some-ever I is got 'long first rate I reckon 'cause you know I owns
my own place here of erbout eighty acres an' has my own meat an' all
such like. I really ain't suffered any for nothin'. Still they has been
times when I ain't had nary a cent an' couldn't get my hands on a dime,
but I is made it out somehow. Us old darkies what come up with de
country, an' was de fust one here, us cleared up de land when there
wasn't nothin' here much, an' built de log houses, an' had to git 'long
on just what us could raise on de land an' so on. Couldn't mind a panic
bad as de young folks what is growed up in de last ginnyration.

"You see, I was borned just three years before de darkies was sot free.
An' course I can't riccolect nothin' 'bout de slavery days myself but my
mammy, she used to tell us chillun 'bout dem times.

"Like I first said, us belonged to de Welborns an' dey was powerful
loyal to de Souf an' er heap of de young ones fit in de army, an' dey
sont corn an' cows an' hogs an' all sich like supplies to de army in
Tennessee an' Georgia. Dat's what my mammy tole me an' I know dey done
dem things, an' dey crazy 'bout Mr. Jefferson Davis, de fust an' only
President of de Confedracy, an' dat's how come me got dis name I got.
Yas suh, dat is how come me named 'Jeff Davis.' An' I always has been
proud of my name, 'cause dat was a sure great one what I is named after.

"My pappy was a white man, dat's what my mammy allus told me. I knows he
bound to been 'cause I is too bright to not have no white blood in me.
My mammy, she named 'Mary Welborn'. She say dat my pappy was a white man
name 'Bill Ward' what lived back in Alabama. Dat's all my mammy ever
told me about my pappy. She never say iffen he work for de Welborns er
no, er iffen he was an overseer er what. I don't know nothin' 'bout him
scusin' dat he er white man an' he named 'Bill Ward'. My steppappy, he
was name John Sanders, an' he married my mammy when I 'bout four year
old, an' dat was atter de slaves taken outen dey bondage.

"My steppappy, he was a fine carpenter an' could do most anything dat he
want to do with an axe or any kind of a tool dat you work in wood with.
I riccolect dat he made a heap of de culberts for de railroad what was
built through Marvell from Helena to Clarendon. He made dem culberts
outen logs what would be split half in two. Then he would hew out de two
halves what he done split open like dey used to make a dug-out boat. Dey
would put dem two halves together like a big pipe under de tracks for de
water to run through.

"There was several white mens dat I knowed in dis part of de county what
raised nigger famblys, but there wasn't so many at dat. I will say this
for them mens though. Whilst it wasn't right for dem to do like dat, dem
what did have 'em a nigger woman what dey had chillun by sure took care
of de whole gang. I riccolect one white man in particular, an' I knows
you is heered of him too. How-some-ever, I won't call no names. He lived
down on de ribber on de island. Dis white man, he was a overseer for a
widder woman what lived in Helena an' what owned de big place dat dis
man oberseer was on. Dis white man, he hab him dis nigger woman for de
longest. She have five chillun by him, three boys an' two gals.

"After a while dis man, he got him a place up close to Marvell where he
moved to. He brought his nigger fambly with him. He built dem a good
house on his farm where he kept them. He give dat woman an' dem chillun
dey livin' till de chillun done grown an' de woman she dead. Then he
married him a nice white woman after he moved close to Marvell. He built
him a house in town where his white wife live an' she de mammy of a heap
of chillun too by dis same man. So dis man, he had a white fambly an' a
half nigger fambly before. De most of de chillun of dis man is livin' in
this county right now.

"Yas suh, Boss, I is sure 'nough growed up with dis here county. In my
young days most all de west end of this county was in de woods. There
wasn't no ditches or no improvements at all. De houses an' barns was
most all made of logs, but I is gwine to tell you one thing, de niggers
an' de white folks, dey get erlong more better together then dan dey
does at dis time. De white folks then an' de darkies, dey just had more
confidence in each other seems like in dem days. I don't know how 'twas
in de other states after de War, but right here in Phillips County de
white folks, dey encouraged de darkies to buy 'em a home. Dey helped dem
to git it. Dey sure done dat. Mr. Marve Carruth, dat was really a good
white man. He helped me to get dis very place here dat I is owned for
fifty years. An' then I tell you dis too, Boss, when I was coming up, de
folks, dey just worked harder dan dey do these days. A good hand then
naturally did just about three er four times as much work in a day as
dey do now. Seems like dis young bunch awful no 'count er bustin' up and
down de road day and night in de cars, er burnin' de gasoline when dey
orter be studyin' 'bout makin' er livin' an' gettin' demselves er home.

"Yas suh, I riccolect all 'bout de time dat de niggers holdin' de jobs
in de courthouse in Helena, but I is never took no part in that votin'
business an' I allus kept out of dem arguments. I left it up to de white
folks to 'tend to de 'lectin' of officers.

"De darkies what was in de courthouse dat I riccolect was: Bill Gray, he
was one of de clerks; Hense Robinson, Dave Ellison, an' some more dat I
don't remember. Bill Gray, he was a eddycated man, but de res', dey was
just plain old ex-slave darkies an' didn't know nothing. Bill Gray, he
used to be de slave of a captain on a steamboat on de ribber. He was
sorter servant to he mars on de boat where he stayed all the time. The
captain used to let him git some eddycation. Darkies, dey never last
long in de courthouse. Dey soon git 'em out.

"I gwine tell you somepin else dat is done changed er lot since I was
comin' up. Dat is, de signs what de folks used to believe in dey don't
believe in no more. Yet de same signs is still here, an' I sure does
believe in 'em 'cause I done seen 'em work for all dese years. De Lawd
give de peoples a sign for all things. De moon an' de stars, dey is a
sign for all them what can read 'em an' tells you when to plant de
cotton an' de taters an' all your crops. De screech owls, dey give er
warnin' dat some one gwine to die. About de best sign dat some person
gwine die 'round close is for a cow to git to lowin' an' a lowin'
constant in de middle of de night. Dat is a sign I hardly is ever seen
fail an' I seen it work out just a few weeks ago when old Aunt Dinah
died up de road. I heered dat cow a lowin' an' a lowin' an' a walkin'
back an' forth down de road for 'bout four nights in a row, right past
Aunt Dinah's cabin. I say to my old woman dat somepin is sure gwine to
take place, an' dat some pusson gwine die soon cause dat cow, she givin'
de sign just right. Dere wasn't nobody 'round sick a tall an' Aunt
Dinah, she plumb well at de time. About er week from then Aunt Dinah,
she took down an' start to sinkin' right off an' in less than a week she
died. I knowed some pusson gwine die all right, yet an' still I didn't
know who it was to be. I tell you, Boss, I is gittin' uneasy an'
troubled de last day or two, 'cause I is done heered another cow a
lowin' an' a lowin' in de middle of de night. She keeps a walkin' back
an' forth past my house out there in de road. I is really troubled
'cause me an' de old woman both is gittin' old. We is both way up in
years an' whilst both of us is in real good health, Aunt Dinah was too.
Dat cow a lowin' like she do is a bad sign dat I done noticed mighty
nigh allus comes true."



