In one of Atlanta's many alleys lives Mose Davis, an ex-slave who was
born on a very large plantation 12 miles from Perry, Georgia. His master
was Colonel Davis, a very rich old man, who owned a large number of
slaves in addition to his vast property holdings. Mose Davis says that
all the buildings on this plantation were whitewashed, the lime having
been secured from a corner of the plantation known as "the lime sink".
Colonel Davis had a large family and so he had to have a large house to
accommodate these members. The mansion, as it was called, was a great
big three-storied affair surrounded by a thick growth of cedar trees.

Mose's parents, Jennie and January Davis, had always been the property
of the Davis family, naturally he and his two brothers and two sisters
never knew any other master than "The Old Colonel".

Mr. Davis says that the first thing he remembers of his parents is being
whipped by his mother who had tied him to the bed to prevent his running
away. His first recollection of his father is seeing him take a drink of
whiskey from a five gallon jug. When asked if this was'nt against the
plantation rules "Uncle Mose" replied: "The Colonel was one of the
biggest devils you ever seen--he's the one that started my daddy to
drinking. Sometimes he used to come to our house to git a drink
hisself".

Mose's Father was the family coachman. "All that he had to do was to
drive the master and his family and to take care of the two big grey
horses that he drove. Compared to my mother and the other slaves he had
an easy time," said Uncle Mose, shaking his head and smiling: "My daddy
was so crazy about the white folks and the horses he drove until I
believe he thought more of them than he did of me. One day while I was
in the stable with him one of the horses tried to kick me and when I
started to hit him Daddy cussed me and threatned to beat me."

His mother, brothers, and sisters, were all field hands, but there was
never any work required of Mose, who was play-mate and companion to
Manning, the youngest of Colonel Davis' five sons. These two spent most
of the time fishing and hunting. Manning had a pony and buggy and
whenever he went to town he always took Mose along.

Field hands were roused, every morning by the overseer who rang the
large bell near the slave quarters. Women [TR: and] young children were
permitted to remain at home until 9 o'clock to prepare breakfast. At 9
o'clock these women had to start to the fields where they worked along
with the others until sundown. The one break in the day's work was the
noon dinner hour. Field hands planted and tended cotton, corn, and the
other produce grown on the plantation until harvest time when everybody
picked cotton. Slaves usually worked harder during the picking season
than at any other time. After harvest, the only remaining work was
cleaning out fence corners, splitting rails building fences and numerous
other minor tasks. In hot weather, the only work was shelling corn.
There was no Sunday work other than caring for the stock.

On this plantation there were quite a few skilled slaves mostly
blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, plasterers, and a cobbler. One of
Mose's brothers was a carpenter.

All slaves too old for field work remained at home where some took care
of the young children, while others worked in the loom houses helping
make the cloth and the clothing used on the plantation. Since no work
was required at night, this time was utilized by doing personal work
such as the washing and the repairing of clothing, etc.

On the Fourth of July or at Christmas Colonel Davis always had a
festival for all his slaves. Barbecue was served and there was much
singing and dancing. These frolics were made merrier by the presence of
guests from other plantations. Music was furnished by some of the slaves
who also furnished music at the mansion whenever the Col. or some of the
members of his family had a party. There was also a celebration after
the crops had been gathered.

Although there was only one distribution of clothing per year nobody
suffered from the lack of clothes because this one lot had enough to
last a year if properly cared for. The children wore one piece garments,
a cross between a dress and a slightly lengthened shirt, made of
homespun or crocus material [TR note: "crocus" is a coarse, loosely
woven material like burlap]. No shoes were given them until winter and
then they got the cast-offs of the grown ups. The men all wore pants
made of material known as "ausenberg". The shirts and under wear were
made of another cotton material. Dresses for the women were of striped
homespun. All shoes were made on the premises of the heaviest leather,
clumsely fashioned and Uncle Mose says that slaves like his father who
worked in the mansion, were given much better clothing. His father
received of "The Colonel" and his grown sons many discarded clothes. One
of the greatest thrills of Mose's boyhood was receiving first pair of
"ausenberg" pants. As his mother had already taught him to knit (by
using four needles at one time) all that he had to do was to go to his
hiding place and get the socks that he had made.

None of the clothing worn by the slaves on this particular plantation
was bought. Everything was made by the slaves, even to the dye that was
used.

Asked if there was sufficient food for all slaves, Uncle Mose said "I
never heard any complaints." At the end of each week every family was
given some fat meat, black molasses, meal and flour in quantity varying
with the size of the family. At certain intervals during the week, they
were given vegetables. Here too, as in everything else, Mose's father
was more fortunate than the others, since he took all his meals at the
mansion where he ate the same food served to the master and his family.
The only difference between Week-day and Sunday diet was that biscuits
were served on Sundays. The children were given only one biscuit each.
In addition to the other bread was considered a delicacy. All food stuff
was grown on the plantation.

The slave quarters were located a short distance below the mansion. The
cabins one-roomed weatherboard structures were arranged so as to form a
semi-circle. There was a wide tree-lined road leading from the master's
home to these cabins.

Furnishings of each cabin consisted of one or two benches, a bed, and a
few cooking utensils. These were very crude, especially the beds. Some
of them had four posts while the ends of others were nailed to the
walls. All lumber used in their construction was very heavy and rough.
Bed springs were unheard of--wooden slats being used for this purpose.
The mattresses were large ausenberg bags stuffed to capacity with hay,
straw, or leaves. Uncle Mose told about one of the slaves, named Ike,
whose entire family slept on bare pine straw. His children were among
the fattest on the plantation and when Colonel Davis tried to make him
put this straw in a bag he refused claiming that the pine needles kept
his children healthy.

The floors and chimneys on the Davis Plantation were made of wood and
brick instead of dirt and mud as was the case on many of the other
surrounding plantations. One window (with shutters instead of window
panes) served the purpose of ventilation and light. At night pine knots
or candles gave light. The little cooking that the slaves did at home
was all done at the open fireplace.

Near the living quarters was a house known as the "chillun house." All
children too young for field work stayed at this house in the care of
the older slave women. There was no hospital building on the premises.
The sick had to remain in their individual cabins where they too were
cared for by slaves too old for field work.

Only one family lived in a cabin. Mose's mother and father each had a
separate cabin. He did not explain the reason for this but said that he
was made to live in his father's cabin. Whenever he could, (usually when
his father was away with the Colonel for a day or two) he stayed in his
mothers cabin. "The only difference between the houses we lived in
during slavery and those that some of us live in now who said is that we
had more room there than we have now." He says that even the community
cook house was larger than some of the living quarters of today. All
cabins were white washed the same as the other buildings on the
plantation, and the occupants were required to keep the interiors and
the surrounding clean at all times. The overseer's cabin was located a
short distance away from the slave cabins, so that it would be easier
for him to keep check on his charges.

There was little if any sickness but Colonel Davis employed a doctor who
visited the plantation each week. On other occasions the overseer
administered such remedies as castor oil, turpentine, etc., and the
slaves had remedies of their own. For stomach ache they used a tea made
of Jimson weeds. Another medicine was heart leaf tea. Manual and
religious training were the only types allowed on the plantation. Trades
like carpentry, blacksmithing, etc. were learned from the white
mechanics sometimes employed by Colonel Davis. All slaves were required
to attend church and a special building was known as "Davis' Chapel." A
Negro preacher officiated and no white people were present. Uncle Mose
doesn't know what was preached as he and Manning always slipped into
town on Sundays to see the girls. Uncle Mose says he and Manning were
together so much that occasionally they even slept in the same
bed,--sometimes in Manning's house and sometimes at his own house.

A pool for baptism was filled with well water. The colored pastor
performed all baptisms and marriages.

Book learning was prohibited in any form. Sometimes Mose tried to
persuade Manning to teach him to read and write but Manning always
refused. Mose's cousin who was taught to read and write forged Colonel
Davis' name to a check and drew the money from the bank before the hand
writing was discovered. For this act he was given a sound whipping and
assigned to hard labor by the master, "And", said Uncle Mose, "he didn't
even have the pleasure of spending one penny". When asked if his cousin
was arrested and placed in jail he replied that the jails were not for
the slaves, as their punishment was usually left to their individual
masters. When his cousin was whipped this was an exception to "The
Colonel's rule"; he was entirely against any form of whipping. His usual
method of punishment was to cut off individual privileges for a limited
amount of time (in proportion to the nature of the offense), along with
an assignment of extra heavy work.

The fame of the "Paddle-Rollers" was widespread among the slaves, but
none of Colonel Davis' servants attempted to run away or leave the
plantation often without the required pass (if they did they were never
caught).

There was very little talk on the plantation about the actual beginning
of the Civil War. Slaves was very guarded in their talk as they feared
the master's wrath. Uncle Mose thought little or nothing about the War
and had even less to say.

When the Yankee soldiers came to the plantation they drove wagons to the
smoke house and took all the meat away. "The funny part about it was
that "The Colonel" had taken shelter in this particular house when he
saw the Yankees coming," said Uncle Mose. "He didn't have time to hide
any of his other belongings." When the soldiers had left, The Colonel
looked around and said to Manning and Mose: "Just like I get that, I
guess I can get some more."

Uncle Mose says that when freedom was declared, his father came rushing
to their cabin waving his arms like a windmill, shouting: "Boy we is
free--you can go and git yourself a job 'cause I ain't goin' to hitch up
no more horses". Some of the slaves remained on the plantation where
they worked for wages until their deaths. His father was one of them and
after his death, his mother moved to another plantation to live with
another son. Meanwhile Mose started traveling from place to place as
soon as he was told that he was free to go as he pleased. He paid one
visit to the plantation where he learned of his father's death. He then
asked Manning, who was operating the plantation, for the ox that had
belonged to his father and when Manning refused to part with this
animal, he made a secret visit back, that night, and took the animal
away. He has not been back since.

At this time Mr. Davis stretched himself, saying: "Well, I guess that's
about as straight as I can get it--Wish that I could tell you some more
but I can't." Smiling broadly, he bade the interviewer a pleasant
good-bye.
