


"I couldn' tell how old I is only as I ask my old Massa son en he tell
me dat I was born ahead of him cause he had de day put down in he family
book. I had one of dem slavery bible, but I have a burnin out so many
times dat it done been burn up. I belong to Mr. George Crawford people.
Mr. George de one what die up here one of dem other year not far back.
Dey who been my white folks."

"I can tell you a good deal bout what de people do in slavery time en
how dey live den, but I can' tell you nothin bout no jump about things.
My Massa didn' 'low us to study bout none of dem kind of frolickings in
dat day en time."

"I gwine tell you it just like I experience it in dem days. We chillun
lived well en had plenty good ration to eat all de time cause my mammy
cook for she Missus dere to de big house. All she chillun lived in a one
room house right dere in de white folks yard en eat in de Missus big
kitchen every day. Dey give my mammy en she chillun just such things as
de white folks had to eat like biscuit en cake en ham en coffee en
hominy en butter en all dat kind of eatin. Didn' have no need to worry
bout nothin 'tall. My Massa had a heap of other colored peoples dere
besides we, but dey never live dat way. Dere been bout 80 of dem dat
live up in de quarter just like you see dese people live to de sawmill
dese days. Dey live mighty near like us, but didn' have no flour bread
to eat en didn' get no milk en ham neither cause dey eat to dey own
house. Didn' get nothin from de dairy but old clabber en dey been mighty
thankful to get dat. Oh, dey had a pretty good house to live in dat was
furnish wid dey own things dat dey make right dere. Den dey had a garden
of dey own. My Massa give every one of he plantation family so much of
land to plant for dey garden en den he give em every Saturday for dey
time to tend dat garden. You see dey had to work for de white folks all
de other week day en dey know when dey hear dat cow horn blow, dey had
to do what de overseer say do. Never couldn' go off de place widout dey
get a mit (permit) from de overseer neither else dey tore up when dey
come back. No 'mam, didn' dare to have nothin no time. Didn' 'low you to
go to school cause if you was to pick up a book, you get bout 100 lashes
for dat. No 'mam, didn' have no church for de colored peoples in dem
days. Just had some of dese big oaks pile up one on de other somewhe' in
de woods on dat whe' we go to church. One of de plantation mens what had
more learnin den de others was de one what do de preachin dere."

"My Massa wasn' never noways scraggeble to he colored peoples. Didn' cut
em for every kind of thing, but I is see him beat my stepfather one time
cause he run away en stay in de woods long time. Oh, he beat him wid a
switch or a stick or anything like dat he could get hold of."

"Didn' never know nothin bout doing no hard work in us chillun days.
When I was a boy, I mind de crows out de field. Oh, crows was terrible
bout pickin up peoples corn in times back dere. You see if dey let de
crows eat de corn up, dey had to go to de trouble of planting it all
over again en dat how-come dey send we chillun in de field to mind de
crows off it. We just holler after em en scare em dat way. Crows was
mighty worser in dem days den dey is dis day en time."

"I sho remembers when freedom was declare cause I was bout 16 year old
den. When dem Yankees talk bout comin round, my Massa take all we
colored boys en all he fast horses en put em back in de woods to de
canebrake to hide em from de Yankees. It been many a year since den, but
I recollects dat we was settin dere lookin for de Yankees to get as any
minute. Wasn' obliged to make no noise neither. Oh, we had big chunk of
lightwood en cook meat en hoecake en collards right dere in de woods.
Den my Massa take one of dem oldest plantation boys to de war wid him en
ain' nobody never hear tell of him no more. He name Willie. O my Lord,
when dey hear talk bout de Yankees comin, dey take all de pots en de
kettles en hide em in holes in de fields en dey put dey silver bout some
tree so dey know whe' dey bury it. Den dey hide de meat en de corn to de
colored peoples house en when dey hear talk of de Yankees gwine away,
dey go en get em again. Dem Yankees never destroy nothin bout dere, but
dey is make my Massa give em a cart of corn en a middlin of meat.
Yes'um, I look at dem Yankees wid me own eyes. Dey was all dressed up in
a blue uniform en dey was just as white as you is. Oh, dey said a lot of
things. Say dey was gwine free de niggers en if it hadn' been for dem,
we would been slaves till yet. Coase I rather be free den a slave, but
we never have so much worryations den as people have dese days. When we
get out of clothes en get sick in dat day en time, we never had to do
nothin but go to us Massa. Now, we have to look bout every which a way."

"My Massa ask my mother was she gwine live with him any longer after
freedom was declare en she say she never have no mind to leave dere. We
live on dere for one year en den we studied to get another place. I
believes heap of dem white folks died just on account of us get freed.
Dey never didn' want us to be free."

"I heard a 'oman say somebody had conjured her, but I don' believe in
none of dat. I knows I got to die some of dese days en dat might come
before me. I don' bother wid none of dat kind of thing, but I'll tell
you bout what I has experience. I had two dogs dere en somebody poison
em cause dey tell me somebody do dat. Oh, I know dey was poison. De
police say de dog was poison. A 'oman do it dat had chillun what was
afraid of my dog en dat how-come she poison it. I sho think she done it
cause it just like dis, anything peoples tell me, I believes it."

"I have seen dem things peoples say is a ghost when I was stayin here to
Lake View. I plant a garden side de road en one night I hear somethin en
I look out en dere was a great big black thing in me garden dat was
makin right for de house. I call me wife en tell her to look yonder. De
thing was comin right to de house en my wife hurry en light up de lamp.
I hear de peoples say if you didn' light up de lamp when you see a
spirit, dat it would sho come in en run you out. I had done paid some
money on de place but after I see dat thing, I didn' have no mind to
want it. Had de best garden en chickens dere I ever had, but I never
bother no worry bout dat. Just pick right up en leave dere to come here
en I been here ever since. I knows dat been somethin come dere to scare
me out dat house. Dat ain' been nothin else but a spirit. Ain' been
nothin else."

  Source: Charlie Davis, age 88, colored, Marion, S. C.
          Personal interview, July 1937.
