


"My parents, dey was sho raise in de South. Been come up on de old man
Foster Brown's plantation. Ain' you know whe' Mr. Foster Brown used to
live? Yes, mam, down dere in dat grove of pecans dat you see settin side
de road, when you be gwine down next to Centenary. I remember, I hear my
father tell bout dat his mammy was sold right here to dis courthouse, on
dat big public square up dere, en say dat de man set her up in de wagon
en took her to Georgetown wid him. Sold her right dere on de block. Oh,
I hear dem talkin bout de sellin block plenty times. Pa say, when he see
dem carry his mammy off from dere, it make he heart swell in his breast.

"Yes'um, I hear my father talk bout how dey would shoot de great big
bomb guns in slavery time. Seems like, he say dat de shootin fuss been
come from Fort Sumter. Oh, my Lord, I hear talk dat de people could hear
dem guns roarin all bout dis here country. I know dat word been true
cause I hear my parents en de olden people speak bout dat right dere
fore we chillun. Say, when dey would feel dat rumblin noise, de people
would be so scared. Didn' know what was gwine happen. Cose I speak bout
what I catch cause de olden people never didn' allow dey chillun to set
en hear dem talk no time. No, mam, de olden people was mighty careful of
de words dey let slip dey lips.

"Oh, we chillun would have de most fun dere ever was romancin (roaming)
dem woods in dat day en time. I used to think it was de nicest thing dat
I been know bout to go down in de woods side one of dem shady branch en
get a cup of right cool water to drink out de stream. I tell you, I
thought dat was de sweetest water I is ever swallowed. Den we chillun
used to go out in de woods wid de crowd en get dese big oak leaves en
hickory leaves en make hats. Would use dese here long pine needles en
thorns for de pins dat we would pick up somewhe' dere in de woods. En we
would dress de hats wid all kind of wild flowers en moss dat we been
find scatter bout in de woods, too. Oh, yes'um, we thought dey was de
prettiest kind of bonnets. Den we would get some of dese green saplin
out de woods often times to make us a ridin horse wid en would cut down
a good size pine another time en make a flyin mare to ride on. Yes, mam,
dat what we would call it. Well, when we would have a mind to make one
of dem flyin mare, we chillun would slip a ax to de woods wid us en chop
down a nice little pine tree, so as dere would be a good big stump left
in de ground. Den we would chisel de top of de stump down all round de
edges till we had us a right sharp peg settin up in de middle of de
stump. After dat was fixed, we would cut us another pole a little bit
smaller den dat one en bore a hole in de middle of it to make it set
down on dat peg. Oh, my Lord, one of us chillun would get on dis end en
dere another one would get on de other end en us chillun would give dem
a shove dat would send dem flyin round fast as I could say
mighty-me-a-life. My blessed a mercy, child, it would most bout knock de
sense out dem what been on dere. Yes, mam, everybody would be crazy to
ride on de flyin mare. All de neighbor's chillun would gather up en go
in de woods en jump en shout bout which one turn come to ride next. I
tellin you, dem was big pleasures us had in dat day en time en dey never
cost nobody nothin neither."

"Well, Mr. Brown, he was mighty good to his colored people, so I hear my
parents say. Would allow all his niggers to go to de white people church
to preachin every Sunday, Cose my father, he was de carriage driver en
he would have task to drive de white folks to church on a Sunday.
Yes'um, dem what been belong to Mr. Brown, dey had dey own benches to
set on right up dere in de gallery to de white people church, but I hear
talk dat some of dem other white people round bout dere never wouldn'
let dey colored people see inside dey church no time. Lord, I talk bout
how de people bless wid privilege to go to church like dey want to in
dis day en time en don' have de mind to serve de Lord like dey ought to
no time. Cose dere a man comes here every Sunday mornin in a car en
takes me out to church. Ain' no kin to me neither. He late sometimes en
de preacher be bout out wid de sermon, but I goes anyhow en gets all I
can. Look like de Lord bless me somehow, cripple up as I is, I say."

"De shake! Oh, I remember it well cause I been a grown girl den.
Everybody thought it was de Jedgment en all de people was runnin out en
a hollerin. I thought it was de last myself en I livin here to tell de
people, I was sho scared. I been out to de well bout 12 o'clock de next
day en I could see de water in de well just a quiverin. Lord, Lord, dat
water tremble bout four weeks after dat. Such a hollerin en a prayin as
de people had bout dat shake. No'um I was livin down dere to Tabernacle
den en dere wasn' none of de houses round us destroyed. No, child, won'
no harm done nowhe' dat I knows of only as a heap of de people been so
scared, dey never didn' grow no more."

"Yes'um, I think bout here de other night dat I had make you a promise
to fetch you up some of dem signs de olden people used to put faith in.
Dere one sign bout if you hear a dog howl or a cow low round your house
on a night, it a pretty good sign you gwine lose somebody out dat house.
I finds dat to be a mighty true sign cause I notices it very closely."

"Den dey used to say, too, if you get up in de mornin feelin in a good
humor, de devil sho gwine get you fore night fall dat same day. Cose I
don' pay so much attention to dat. If I get up feelin like singin, I has
to sing cause it my time to sing, I say."

"Let me see, dere another one of dem omen dat I had shake up in my mind
to tell you. Say, if you see a ground mole rootin round your house, it
won' be long fore you gwine move from dat place. But I don' never see
no ground moles hardly dese days. Don' think dey worries nobody much."

"I recollects, too, way back yonder de people used to say, if you see de
smoke comin out de chimney en turn down en flatten out on de ground, it
a sign of rain in a few days."

"Yes, mam, I think bout dis one more. If you dream bout you be travelin
en come to a old rotten down buildin, it a sign of a old person death.
Don' say whe' it a man or a woman, but it a sho sign dat a old person
gwine die."

"Den people what lives in de country believes, if a fox comes round a
house barkin en a scratchin, it a sign dey gwine lose somebody out dey
family. Yes'um, de fox just comes right out de woods up to de yard en
barks. You see, a dog won' never run a fox dat comes bout dem barkin.
No, mam, when de dog hear dat, he just stands right under de house en
growls at de fox. I know dat be a true sign cause us tried dat one."

"Now, I got another one of dem thought comin. Yes, my Lord, I hear talk
dat if you get de broom en sweep your house out fore sunrise, you would
sweep your friends out right wid de trash. Dat used to be a big sign wid
de people, too. En it bad luck to take up ashes after de sun go down,
dey say. Yes, I know bout plenty people won' do dat today."

"Well, honey, seems like when I calls back, de people in a worser fix
den when I used to get 25 cents a day. Used to could take dat en go to a
country store en get a decent dress to wear to church. Sell peck of us
corn en get it in trade. Didn' never pay more den 50 cents for a load of
wood in dem days en I remembers just as good eggs been sell for 10 cents
a dozen en 15 cents bout Christmas time. Cose I ain' exactly decided
what to speak bout de times cause it dis way to my mind. De people, dey
have a better privilege dis day en time, but dey don' appreciate nothin
like dey did back in my dark days. Yes, mam, de people was more thankful
to man en God den dey is dese days. Dat my belief bout de way de world
turnin, I say."

  Source: Lizzie Davis, colored, age between 70 and 80, Marion,
          S. C.
          Personal interview by Annie Ruth Davis, Dec., 1937.
