FROM ATLANTA CONSTITUTION,
  NOVEMBER 10, 1900. Quite a remarkable case of longevity is had in the person of Edie
 Dennis, a colored woman of Columbus, who has reached the unusual
     age of 109 years of age and is still in a state of fair health.

     Aunt Edie lives with two of her daughters at No. 1612 Third Avenue,
     in this city. She has lived in three centuries, is a great-great
     grandmother and has children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren
     and great-great-grandchildren, aggregating in all over a hundred
     persons. She lives with one of her "young" daughters, sixty-six.

     Edie Dennis is no doubt one of the oldest persons living in the
     United States. Cases are occasionally reported where 105 years is
     reached, but 109 years is an age very seldom attained. A wonderful
     feature of this case is that this old woman is the younger sister
     of another person now living. Aunt Edie has a brother living at
     Americus, Georgia, who is 111 years old.

     Notwithstanding her great age, Aunt Edie is in fairly good health.
     She is naturally feeble and her movements are limited. Even in her
     little home, from which she never stirs. Although she is feeble,
     her faculties seem clear and undimmed and she talked interestingly
     and intelligently to a Constitution reporter who called upon her
     recently.

     Aunt Edie was born in 1791, just eight years before the death of
     George Washington occurred. She was a mother when the war of 1812
     took place. The establishment of Columbus as a city was an event of
     her mature womanhood. The Indian War of the thirties she recalls
     very distinctly. She was getting old when the Mexican War took
     place. She was an old woman when the great conflict between the
     states raged. She was seventy-five years of age when she became
     free.

     It is quite needless to say that Aunt Edie was a slave all her life
     up to the year 1866. She was born in Hancock County, Georgia,
     between Milledgeville and Sparta. She was the property of Thomas
     Schlatter. She came to Columbus just after the town had been laid
     off, when she was a comparatively young woman. She became the
     property of the family of Judge Hines Holt, the distinguished
     Columbus lawyer. She says that when she first came here there was
     only a small collection of houses. Where her present home was
     located was then nothing but swamp land. The present location of
     the court house was covered with a dense woods. No event in those
     early years impressed itself more vividly upon Aunt Edie's mind
     than the Indian War, in the thirties. She was at the home of one of
     the Indians when she first heard of the uprising against the
     whites, and she frankly says that she was frightened almost to
     death when she listened to the cold-blooded plots to exterminate
     the white people. Not much attention was paid to her on account of
     her being a Negro. Those were very thrilling times and Aunt Edie
     confesses that she was exceedingly glad when the troubles with the
     red men were over. Another happening of the thirties which Aunt
     Edie recalls quite distinctly is the falling of the stars. She says
     quaintly that there was more religion that year in Georgia than
     there ever was before or has been since. The wonderful manner in
     which the stars shot across the heavens by the thousands, when
     every sign seemed to point to the destruction of the earth, left a
     lasting impression upon her brain.

     Aunt Edie says that she was kindly treated by her masters. She says
     that they took interest in the spiritual welfare of their slaves
     and that they were called in for prayer meeting regularly. Aunt
     Edie was such an old woman when she was freed that the new
     condition meant very little change in life for her, as she had
     about stopped work, with the exception of light tasks about the
     house.

     There seems to be no doubt that Aunt Edie is 109 years old. She
     talks intelligently about things that occurred 100 years ago. All
     her children, grandchildren, etc., asserts that her age is exactly
     as stated. Indeed, they have been the custodians of her age, so to
     speak, for nearly half a century. It was a matter of great interest
     to her family when she passed the 100 mark.

     Aunt Edie is religious and she delights in discussing scriptural
     matters. She has practical notions, however, and while she is
     morally sure she will go to a better world when she dies, she
     remarks, "That we know something about this world, but nothing
     about the next."

     Perhaps this is one reason why Aunt Edie has stayed here 109 years.

            *       *       *       *       *

     NOTE: Mary Gladdy (806-1/2 - Sixth Avenue, Columbus, Georgia). A
     grand-daughter of Edie Dennis, states that her grandmother died in
     1901, aged 110.
