"I am eighty-one years old. I was born close to Saratoga, North
Carolina. My mother died before I can recollect and my grandmother
raised me. They said my father was a white man. They said Jim Beckton. I
don't recollect him. My mother was named Mariah Tyson.

"I recollect how things was. My grandmother was Miss Nancy Tyson's cook.
She had one son named Mr. Seth Tyson. He run her farm. They et in the
dining room, we et in the kitchen. Clothes and something to eat was
scarce. I worked at whatever I was told to do. Grandma told me things to
do and Miss Nancy told me what to do. I went to the field when I was
pretty little. Once my uncle left the mule standing out in the field and
went off to do something else. It come up a hard shower. I crawled under
the mule. If I had been still it would been all right but my hair stood
up and tickled the mule's stomach. The mule jumped and the plough hit me
in my hip here at the side. It is a wonder I didn't get killed.

"After the Civil War was times like now. Money scarce and prices high,
and you had to start all over new. Pigs was hard to start, mules and
horses was mighty scarce. Seed was scarce. Everything had to be started
from the stump. Something to eat was mighty plain and scarce and one or
two dresses a year had to do. Folks didn't study about going so much.

"I had to rake up leaves and fetch em to the barn to make beds for the
little pigs in cold weather. The rake was made out of wood. It had
hickory wood teeth and about a foot long. It was heavy. I put my leaves
in a basket bout so high [three or four feet high]. I couldn't tote
it--I drug it. I had to get leaves in to do a long time and wait till
the snow got off before I could get more. It seem like it snowed a lot.
The pigs rooted the leaves all about in day and back up in the corners
at night. It was ditched all around. It didn't get very muddy. Rattle
snakes was bad in the mountains. I used to tote water--one bucketful on
my head and one bucketful in each hand. We used wooden buckets. It was
lot of fun to hunt guinea nests and turkey nests. When other little
children come visiting that is what we would do. We didn't set around
and listen at the grown folks. We toted up rocks and then they made rock
rows [terraces] and rock fences about the yard and garden. They looked
so pretty. Some of them would be white, some gray, sometimes it would be
mixed. They walled wells with rocks too. All we done or knowed was work.
When we got tired there was places to set and rest. The men made plough
stocks and hoe handles and worked at the blacksmith shop in snowy
weather. I used to pick up literd [HW: lightwood] knots and pile them in
piles along the road so they could take them to the house to burn. They
made a good light and kindling wood.

"They didn't whoop Grandma but she whooped me a plenty.

"After the war some white folks would tell Grandma one thing and some
others tell her something else. She kept me and cooked right on. I
didn't know what freedom was. Seemed like most of them I knowed didn't
know what to do. Most of the slaves left the white folks where I was
raised. It took a long time to ever get fixed. Some of them died, some
went to the cities, some up North, some come to new country. I married
and come to Fredonia, Arkansas in 1889. I had been married since I was a
young girl. But as I was saying the slaves was still hunting a better
place and more freedom. The young folks is still hunting a better place
and more freedom. Grandma learnt me to set down and be content. We have
done better out here than we could done in North Carolina but I don't
believe in so much rambling.

"We come on the passenger train and paid our own way to Arkansas. It was
a wild and sickly country and has changed. Not like living in the same
country. I try to live like the white folks and Grandma raised me. I do
like they done. I think is the reason we have saved and have good a
living as we got. We do on as little as we can and save a little for the
rainy day."

