"Bill Kidd and Miss Nancy Kidd owned my parents. I was born close to
Okalona, Chickasha County, Mississippi, about the last year of the Civil
War. Mr. Bill was Miss Nancy's boy. He was a nigger trader. They said
the overseers treated em pretty rough. They made em work in nearly a
run. When Miss Nancy was living they was rich but after she died he got
down pretty low. He married. Course I knowd em. I been through his
house. He had a fine house. My mother said she was born in Virginia. She
belong to Addison and Duley. Her mother come wid her. They sold them but
didn't sell her father so she never seed him no more. She walked or come
in a ox wagon part of the way. She was with a _drove_. My father come
from North Carolina. His father was free. My father weighed out rations.
He was bright color. He worked round the house and then durin' the war
he run a refugee wagon. The Yankees got men, mules, meat from Mr. Bill
Kidd. My father he was hiding em and hiding the provisions from one
place to another to keep the Yankees from starving em all to death. My
mother had nine boys. They all belong to Mr. Miller. He died, his widow
married Mr. Owen then Mr. Owen sold them to Mrs. Kidd. That was where
they was freed. My parents stayed about Mrs. Kidd's till she died. They
worked for a third some of the time, I don't know how long. When I was a
boy size of that yonder biggest boy my folks was still thinking the
government was going to give em something. I was ten years old when they
left Mrs. Kidd's. They thought the government was going to give em 40
acres and a mule or some kind of a start. I don't know where they got
the notion. My father voted down in Mississippi. I vote. I was working
in the car shops in St. Louis in 1923. Me and my wife both voted then. I
worked there two years. I come back to Arkansas where I could farm. The
land was better here than in Mississippi. I walked part of the way and
rode part of the way when I come here from Mississippi. I vote a
Republican ticket. Bout all I owns is two little pigs and a few
chickens. I did have a spring garden. We work in the field and make a
little to eat and wear.

"I find the present times is hard for old folks. Some young folks is
doing well I guess. They look like it. I made application twice for help
but I ain't never got on. I don't know what to think bout the young
folks. If they can get a living they have a good time. They don't worry
bout the future. A little money don't buy nothin' much now. It seem like
everything is to buy. Money is hard to get."



