
H.H. Edmunds has resided at 403 West Hickory Street in Elkhart for
the past ten years. Born in Lynchburg, Virginia, in 1859, he lived there
for several years. Later he was taken to Mississippi by his master, and
finally to Nashville, Tennessee, where he lived until his removal to
Elkhart.

Mr. Edmunds is very religious, and for many years has served his people
as a minister of the Gospel. He feels deeply that the religion of today
has greatly changed from the "old time religion." In slavery days, the
colored people were so subjugated and uneducated that he claims they
were especially susceptible to religion, and poured out their religious
feelings in the so-called negro spirituals. Mr. Edmunds is convinced
that the superstitions of the colored people and their belief in ghosts
and gobblins is due to the fact that their emotions were worked upon by
slave drivers to keep them in subjugation. Oftentimes white people
dressed as ghosts, frightened the colored people into doing many things
under protest. The "ghosts" were feared far more than the slave-drivers.

The War of the Rebellion is not remembered by Mr. Edmunds, but he
clearly remembers the period following the war known as the
Reconstruction Period. The Negroes were very happy when they learned
they were free as a result of the war. A few took advantage of their
freedom immediately, but many, not knowing what else to do, remained
with their former masters. Some remained on the plantations five years
after they were free. Gradually they learned to care for themselves,
often through instructions received from their former masters, and then
they were glad to start out in the world for themselves. Of course,
there were exceptions, for the slaves who had been abused by cruel
masters were only too glad to leave their former homes.

The following reminiscense is told by Mr. Edmunds:

"As a boy, I worked in Virginia for my master, a Mr. Farmer[TR:?]. He
had two sons who served as bosses on the farm. An elder sister was the
head boss. After the war was over, the sister called the colored people
together and told them that they were no longer slaves, that they might
leave if they wished.

"The slaves had been watering cucumbers which had been planted around
barrels filled with soil. Holes had been bored in the barrels, and when
water was poured in the barrels, it gradually seeped out through the
holes thus watering the cucumbers.

"After the speech, one son told the slaves to resume their work. Since I
was free, I refused to do so, and as a result, I received a terrible
kicking. I mentally resolved to get even some day. Years afterward, I
went to the home of this man for the express purpose of seeking revenge.
However, I was received so kindly, and treated so well, that all
thoughts of vengeance vanished. For years after, my former boss and I
visited each other in our own homes."

Mr. Edmunds states that the Negro people prefer to be referred to as
colored people, and deeply resent the name "nigger."
