ANN J. EDWARDS, 81, was born a slave of John Cook, of Arlington
     County, Virginia. He manumitted his slaves in 1857. Four years
     later Ann was adopted by Richard H. Cain, a colored preacher. He
     was elected to the 45th Congress in 1876, and remained in
     Washington, D.C., until his death, in 1887. Ann married Jas. E.
     Edwards, graduate of Howard College, a preacher. She now lives with
     her granddaughter, Mary Foster, at 804 E. 4th St., Fort Worth,
     Texas.


"I shall gladly relate the story of my life. I was born a slave on
January 27th, 1856, and my master's name was John J. Cook, who was a
resident of Arlington County, Virginia. He moved to Washington, D.C.,
when I was nearly two years old and immediately gave my parents their
freedom. They separated within a year after that, and my mother earned
our living, working as a hairdresser until her death in 1861. I was then
adopted by Richard H. Cain, a minister of the Gospel in the African
Methodist Church.

"I remember the beginning of the war well. The conditions made a deep
impression on my mind, and the atmosphere of Washington was charged with
excitement and expectations. There existed considerable need for
assistance to the Negroes who had escaped after the war began, and Rev.
Cain took a leading part in rendering aid to them. They came into the
city without clothes or money and no idea of how to secure employment. A
large number were placed on farms, some given employment as domestics
and still others mustered into the Federal Army.

"The city was one procession of men in blue and the air was full of
martial music. The fife and drum could be heard almost all the time, so
you may imagine what emotions a colored person of my age would
experience, especially as father's church was a center for congregating
the Negroes and advising them. That was a difficult task, because a
large majority were illiterate and ignorant.

"The year father was called to Charleston, South Carolina, to take
charge of a church, we became the center of considerable trouble. It was
right after the close of the war. In addition to his ministerial duties,
father managed a newspaper and became interested in politics. He was
elected a delegate to the Constitutional Convention of South Carolina in
1868. He was also elected a Republican member of the State Senate and
served from 1868 to 1872. Then he became the Republican candidate for
the United States Representative of the Charleston district, was elected
and served in the 45th Congress from March 4, 1877 to March 3, 1879.

"You can imagine the bitter conflict his candidacy brought on. A Negro
running for public office against a white person in a Southern state
that was strong for slavery does not seem the sensible thing for a man
to do, but he did and was, of course, successful. From the moment he
became delegate to the Constitutional Convention a guard was necessary
night and day to watch our home. He was compelled to have a bodyguard
wherever he went. We, his family, lived in constant fear at all times.
Many times mother pleaded with him to cease his activities, but her
pleadings were of no avail.

"In the beginning the resentment was not so pronounced. The white
people were shocked and dejected over the outcome of the war, but
gradually recovered. As they did, determination to establish order and
prosperity developed, and they resented the Negro taking part in public
affairs. On the other side of the cause was the excess and obstinate
actions of some ignorant Negroes, acting under ill advice. Father was
trying to prevent excesses being done by either side. He realized that
the slaves were unfit, at that time, to take their place as dependable
citizens, for the want of experience and wisdom, and that there would
have to be mental development and wisdom learned by his race, and that
such would only come by a gradual process.

"He entered the contest in the interest of his own race, primarily, but
as a whole, to do justice to all. No one could change his course. He
often stated, 'It is by the Divine will that I am in this battle.'

"The climax of the resentment against him took place when he was chosen
Republican candidate to the House of Representatives. He had to maintain
an armed guard at all times. Several times, despite these guards,
attempts were made to either burn the house or injure some member of the
family. If it had not been for the fact that the officials of the city
and county were afraid of the federal government, which gave aid in
protecting him, the mob would have succeeded in harming him.

"A day or two before election a mob gathered suddenly in front of the
house, and we all thought the end had come. Father sent us all upstairs,
and said he would, if necessary, give himself up to the mob and let them
satisfy their vengeance on him, to save the rest of us.

"While he was talking, mother noticed another body of men in the alley.
They were certainly sinister looking. Father told us to prepare for the
worst, saying, 'What they plan to do is for those in front to engage
the attention of ourselves and the guard, then those in the rear will
fire the place and force us out.' He was calm throughout it all, but
mother was greatly agitated and I was crying.

"The chief of the guard called father for a parley. The mob leader
demanded that father come out for a talk. Then the sheriff and deputies
appeared and he addressed the crowd of men, and told them if harm came
to us the city would be placed under martial law. The men then
dispersed, after some discussion among themselves.

"Father moved to Washington, took the oath of office and served until
March 4th, 1879. He then received the appointment of Bishop of the
African Methodist Church and served until his death in Washington, on
Jan. 18th, 1887.

"I began my schooling in Charleston and continued in Washington, where I
entered Howard College, but did not continue until graduation. I met
James E. Edwards, another student, who graduated in 1881, and my heart
overruled my desire for an education. We married and he entered the
ministry and was called to Dallas, Texas. He remained two years, then we
were called to Los Angeles. The Negroes there were privileged to enter
public eating establishments, but a cafe owner we patronized told us the
following:

"'After a time, I was compelled to refuse service to Negroes because
they abused the privilege. They came in in a boisterous manner and
crowded and shoved other patrons. It was due to a lack of wisdom and
education.'

"That was true. The white people tried to give the Negro his rights and
he abused the privilege because he was ignorant, a condition he could
not then help.

"My husband and I were called to Kansas City in 1896 and from there to
many other towns. Finally we came to Waco, and he had charge of a church
there when he died, in 1927. We had a pleasant married life and I tried
to do my duty as a pastor's wife and help elevate my race. We were
blessed with three children, and the only one now living is in Boston,
Massachusetts.

"I now reside with my granddaughter, Mary Foster, and this shack is the
best her husband can afford. In fact, we are living in destitute
circumstances. It is depressing to me, after having lived a life in a
comfortable home. It is the Lord's will and I must accept what is
provided. There is a purpose for all things. I shall soon go to meet my
Maker, with the satisfaction of having done my duty--first, to my race,
second, to mankind.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Note: The biography of Richard H. Cain is published in the
     Biographical Directory of the American Congress.
