LUCINDA ELDER, 86, was born a slave of the Cardwell family, near
     Concord Deport, Virginia. She came to Texas with Will Jones and his
     wife, Miss Susie, in 1860, and was their nurse-girl until she
     married Will Elder, in 1875. Lucinda lives at 1007 Edwards St.,
     Houston, Texas.


"You chilluns all go 'way now, while I talks to dis gen'man. I 'clares
to goodness, chilluns nowadays ain't got no manners 'tall. 'Tain't like
when I was li'l, dey larnt you manners and you larnt to mind, too.
Nowadays you tell 'em to do somethin' and you is jes' wastin' you
breath, 'less you has a stick right handy. Dey is my great
grandchilluns, and dey sho' is spoilt. Maybe I ain't got no patience no
more, like I use to have, 'cause dey ain't so bad.

"Well, suh, you all wants me to tell you 'bout slave times, and I'll
tell you first dat I had mighty good white folks, and I hope dey is gone
up to Heaven. My mama 'long to Marse John Cardwell, what I hear was de
riches' man and had de bigges' plantation round Concord Depot. Dat am in
Campbell County, in Virginny. I don't 'member old missy's name, but she
mighty good to de slaves, jes' like Marse John was.

"Mama's name was Isabella and she was de cook and born right on de
plantation. Papa's name was Gibson, his first name was Jim, and he 'long
to Marse Gibson what had a plantation next to Marse John, and I knows
papa come to see mama on Wednesday and Sat'day nights.

"Lemme see, now, dere was six of us chilluns. My mem'ry ain't so good no
more, but Charley was oldes', den come Dolly and Jennie and Susie and me
and Laura. Law me, I guess old Dr. Bass, what was doctor for Marse John,
use to be right busy with us 'bout once a year for quite a spell.

"Dem times dey don't marry by no license. Dey takes a slave man and
woman from de same plantation and puts 'em together, or sometime a man
from 'nother plantation, like my papa and mama. Mamma say Marse John
give 'em a big supper in de big house and read out de Bible 'bout
obeyin' and workin' and den dey am married. Course, de nigger jes' a
slave and have to do what de white folks say, so dat way of marryin'
'bout good as any.

"But Marse John sho' was de good marse and we had plenty to eat and wear
and no one ever got whipped. Marse John say iffen he have a nigger what
oughta be whipped, he'd git rid of him quick, 'cause a bad nigger jes'
like a rotten 'tater in a sack of good ones--it spoil de others.

"Back dere in Virginny it sho' git cold in winter, but come September de
wood gang git busy cuttin' wood and haulin' it to de yard. Dey makes two
piles, one for de big house and de bigges' pile for de slaves. When dey
git it all hauled it look like a big woodyard. While dey is haulin', de
women make quilts and dey is wool quilts. Course, dey ain't made out of
shearin' wool, but jes' as good. Marse John have lots of sheep and when
dey go through de briar patch de wool cotch on dem briars and in de fall
de women folks goes out and picks de wool off de briars jes' like you
picks cotton. Law me, I don't know nothin' 'bout makin' quilts out of
cotton till I comes to Texas.

"Course I never done no work, 'cause Marse John won't work no one till
dey is fifteen years old. Den dey works three hours a day and dat all.
Dey don't work full time till dey's eighteen. We was jes' same as free
niggers on our place. He gives each slave a piece of ground to make de
crop on and buys de stuff hisself. We growed snap beans and corn and
plant on a light moon, or turnips and onions we plant on de dark moon.

"When I gits old 'nough Marse John lets me take he daughter, Nancy Lee,
to school. It am twelve miles and de yard man hitches up old Bess to de
buggy and we gits in and no one in dat county no prouder dan what I was.

"Marse John lets us go visit other plantations and no pass, neither.
Iffen de patterroller stop us, we jes' say we 'long to Marse John and
dey don't bother us none. Iffen dey comes to our cabin from other
plantations, dey has to show de patterroller de pass, and iffen dey
slipped off and ain't got none, de patterroller sho' give a whippin'
den. But dey waits till dey off our place, 'cause Marse John won't 'low
no whippin' on our place by no one.

"Well, things was jes' 'bout de same all de time till jes' 'fore
freedom. Course, I hears some talk 'bout bluebellies, what dey call de
Yanks, fightin' our folks, but dey wasn't fightin' round us. Den one dey
mamma took sick and she had hear talk and call me to de bed and say,
'Lucinda, we all gwine be free soon and not work 'less we git paid for
it.' She sho' was right, 'cause Marse John calls all us to de cookhouse
and reads de freedom papers to us and tells us we is all free, but iffen
we wants to stay he'll give us land to make a crop and he'll feed us.
Now I tells you de truth, dey wasn't no one leaves, 'cause we all loves
Marse John.

"Den, jus' three weeks after freedom mama dies and dat how come me to
leave Marse John. You see, Marse Gibson what owns papa 'fore freedom,
was a good marse and when papa was sot free Marse Gibson gives him some
land to farm. 'Course, papa was gwine have us all with him, but when
mamma dies, Marse Gibson tell him Mr. Will Jones and Miss Susie, he
wife, want a nurse girl for de chilluns, so papa hires me out to 'em and
I want to say right now, dey jes' as good white folks as Marse John and
Old Missy, and sho' treated me good.

"Law me, I never won't forgit one day. Mr. Will say, 'Lucinda, we is
gwine drive you over to Appomatox and take de chilluns and you can come,
too.' Course, I was tickled mos' to pieces but he didn't tell what he
gwine for. You know what? To see a nigger hung. I gettin' long mighty
old now, but I won't never forgit dat. He had kilt a man, and I never
saw so many people 'fore, what dere to see him hang. I jes' shut my
eyes.

"Den Mr. Will he take me to de big tree what have all de bark strip off
it and de branches strip off, and say, 'Lucinda, dis de tree where Gen.
Lee surrendered.' I has put dese two hands right on dat tree, yes, suh,
I sho' has.

"Miss Susie say one day, 'Lucinda, how you like to go with us to Texas?'
Law me, I didn't know where Texas was at, or nothin', but I loved Mr.
Will and Miss Susie and de chilluns was all wrop up in me, so I say I'll
go. And dat how come I'm here, and I ain't never been back, and I ain't
see my own sisters and brother and papa since.

"We come to New Orleans on de train and takes de boat on de Gulf to
Galveston and den de train to Hempstead. Mr. Will farm at first and den
he and Miss Susie run de hotel, and I stays with dem till I gets married
to Will Elder in '75, and I lives with him till de good Lawd takes him
home.

"I has five chilluns but all dead now, 'ceptin' two. I done served de
Lawd now for 64 years and soon he's gwine call old Lucinda, but I'm
ready and I know I'll be better off when I die and go to Heaven, 'cause
I'm old and no 'count now.
