


The Rev. John B. Elliott, A.B.A. A.M., D.D., 1315 Liberty Hill Avenue,
Columbia, S.C., is the son of slaves. He was born at Mount Olive, N.C.,
in 1869, and missed being a slave by only four years. His college
degrees were won at Shaw University, Raleigh, N.C., and the degree of
Doctor of Divinity was conferred on him by Allen University of Columbia,
S.C.

Sitting on the parsonage piazza recently, the Rector of St. Anna's
Episcopal Church talked about his struggle for education, and his labors
up from slavery.

"I was born at Mount Olive, N.C., the son of Soloman Elliott and Alice
(Roberts) Elliott. They were slaves when they married, and I escaped
bondage by only four years, since slaves were not freed in the South,
until 1865.

"My father was owned by Robert W. Williams, of Mount Olive, and he was
the most highly prized Negro in the vicinity. He was a natural carpenter
and builder. Often he would go to the woods and pick out trees for the
job in hand. Some of the houses he built there are standing today.
Mother was equally trained and well equipped to make a home and keep it
neat and clean. When they were free in 1865, half the community was
eager to employ them and pay them well for their services. And, when I
came along, they were living in their own house and prospering.

"I chose a religious career when quite a boy, and, when I was ready for
college, I was much pleased. I finished at Shaw University at Raleigh,
took a year's study at Columbia University in New York and then finished
a religious course at the Bishop Payne Divinity School at Petersburg,
Virginia, where most of the colored clergymen of the Episcopal Church
are finished. After I felt that I was fairly well fitted to begin my
clerical work, I chose South Carolina as my field.

"My first assignment was at Waccamaw Neck, a little below Georgetown,
S.C., and a big industrial center. There the Negro population is keen
for wine and whiskey. One of the men whom I was interested in, was
pretty tipsy when I called, and, as I sat and talked with him, he said:
'You're drunk, too.' This surprised me, and I asked him why he thought
so. 'Well, you got your vest and collar on backwards, so you must be
drunk!'

"Since, I have had pastorates at Aiken, Peak, Rock Hill, and Walterboro.
From Walterboro I came to Columbia as pastor of St. Anna's Episcopal
Church and the missions of Ann's at New Brookland and St. Thomas at
Eastover. I presume I have done pretty well in this field, since the Rt.
Rev. Bishop Kirkman G. Finlay, D.D., appointed me arch-deacon for Negro
work in upper South Carolina.

"As I was coming away from the Bishop's office, I was accompanied by
another colored rector, who had very short legs. I am six feet, four
inches in height, and he looked up at me as we walked along and asked
quizzically: 'How long should a man's legs be?' I smiled and told him I
thought, perhaps, every man should have legs long enough to reach to the
ground. Yes, of course, we laughed at each other, but my argument won,
because Bishop Finlay is about six feet, three inches, and I told my
short friend: 'When Bishop Finlay and I talk, we are able to look each
other in the eye on the level.'

"I married Susan McMahan, a colored school teacher, and the Lord has
blessed us with a son, John B. Jr., a fine wood-worker, like his
grandfather was, and two sweet daughters. Alice, the older one, is a
teacher in the public schools of Columbia and Annie is a student. Our
home life has always been pleasant and unusually sunny.

"I had one very humorous experience three years ago when I was invited
to deliver an address near Mount Olive, N.C., to a convention of young
people. Arriving about 10 o'clock that day, I was met by a citizen who
told me he was assigned to introduce me that evening. As we rode along,
I cautioned him not to boost me too highly. He said little.

"When the big, and, I may say, expectant audience was seated that night,
he arose and seemed much embarrassed, ultimately saying: 'Ladies and
gentlemen, I have an unpleasant duty to perform this evening.' Then,
pointing at me, he went on: 'I don't know this man, much. Fact is, I
only know two things about him. One is, he has never been in jail; and
the other is, I never could figure why.'

"No, I am not related to the late Robert Bruce Elliott by ties of
consanguinity. He was successively twice a member of Congress from South
Carolina, and a member and Speaker of the South Carolina House of
Representatives in 1876. Perhaps these honors came to him because he had
a good education before he met the opportunity for service.

"When I think of the '60's-'70's period, I am surprised that recent
slaves, suddenly placed in administrative positions of honor and trust,
did as well as they did.

"In the seventy-two years since slavery, I have noted much improvement
along the road, and I am sure that our nation has far less discord now,
than it had when I was a small lad. And, when one can note progress in
our march toward the light, I guess that ought to be sufficient for my
optimism."
