JOHN FINNELY, 86, was born a slave to Martin Finnely, in Jackson
     Co., Alabama. During the Civil War ten slaves escaped from the
     Finnely plantation. Their success led John to escape. He joined the
     Federal Army. John farmed from 1865 until 1917, then moved to Fort
     Worth, Tex., and worked in packing plants until 1930. He now lives
     at 2812 Cliff St., Fort Worth, his sole support a $17.00 monthly
     pension.


"Alabama am de state where I's born and dat 86 year ago, in Jackson
County, on Massa Martin Finnely's plantation, and him owns 'bout 75
other slaves 'sides mammy and me. My pappy am on dat plantation but I
don't know him, 'cause mammy never talks 'bout him 'cept to say, 'He am
here.'

"Massa run de cotton plantation but raises stock and feed and corn and
cane and rations for de humans sich as us. It am diff'rent when I's a
young'un dan now. Den, it am needful for to raise everything yous need,
'cause dey couldn't 'pend on factory made goods. Dey could buy shoes and
clothes and sich, but we'uns could make dem so much cheaper.

"What we'uns make? 'Low me to 'collect a li'l. Let's see, we'uns make
shoes, and leather and clothes and cloth and grinds de meal. And we'uns
cures de meat, preserves de fruit and make 'lassas and brown sugar. All
de harness for de mules and de hosses is make and de carts for haulin'.
Am dat all? Oh, yes, massa make peach brandy and him have he own still.

"De work am 'vided 'twixt de cullud folks and us allus have certain
duties to do. I's am de field hand and befo' I's old 'nough for to do
dat, dey has me help with de chores and errands.

"Us have de cabins of logs with one room and one door and one window
hole and bunks for sleepin'. But no cookin' am done dere. It am done in
de cookhouse by de cooks for all us niggers and we'uns eats in de eatin'
shed. De rations am good, plain victuals and dere plenty of it and 'bout
twict a week dere somethin' for treat. Massa sho' am 'ticular 'bout
feedin', 'specially for de young'uns in de nursery. You see, dere am de
nursery for sich what needs care while dere mammies am a-workin'.

"Massa feed plenty and him 'mand plenty work. Dat cause heap of trouble
on dat plantation, 'cause whippin's am given and hard ones, too. Lots of
times at de end of de day I's so tired I's couldn't speak for to stop de
mule, I jus' have to lean back on de lines.

"Dis nigger never gits whupped 'cept for dis, befo' I's a field hand.
Massa use me for huntin' and use me for de gun rest. When him have de
long shot I bends over and puts de hands on de knees and massa puts his
gun on my back for to git de good aim. What him kills I runs and fotches
and carries de game for him. I turns de squirrels for him and dat
disaway: de squirrel allus go to udder side from de hunter and I walks
'round de tree and de squirrel see me and go to massa's side de tree and
he gits de shot.

"All dat not so bad, but when he shoots de duck in de water and I has to
fotch it out, dat give me de worryment. De fust time he tells me to go
in de pond I's skeert, powe'ful skeert. I takes off de shirt and pants
but there I stands. I steps in de water, den back 'gain, and 'gain.
Massa am gittin' mad. He say, 'Swim in dere and git dat duck.' 'Yes,
sar, massa,' I says, but I won't go in dat water till massa hit me some
licks. I couldn't never git use to bein' de water dog for de ducks.

"De worst whuppin' I seed was give to Clarinda. She hits massa with de
hoe 'cause he try 'fere with her and she try stop him. She am put on de
log and give 500 lashes. She am over dat log all day and when dey takes
her off, she am limp and act deadlike. For a week she am in de bunk. Dat
whuppin' cause plenty trouble and dere lots of arg'ments 'mong de white
folks 'round dere.

"We has some joyments on de plantation, no parties or dancin' but we has
de corn huskin' and de nigger fights. For de corn huskin' everybody come
to one place and dey gives de prize for findin' de red ear. On massa's
place de prize am brandy or you am 'lowed to kiss de gal you calls for.
While us huskin' us sing lots. No, no, I's not gwine sing any dem songs,
'cause I's forgit and my voice sound like de bray of de mule.

"De nigger fights am more for de white folks' joyment but de slaves am
'lowed to see it. De massas of plantations match dere niggers 'cording
to size and bet on dem. Massa Finnely have one nigger what weighs 'bout
150 pounds and him powerful good fighter and he like to fight. None
lasts long with him. Den a new niggers comes to fight him.

"Dat fight am held at night by de pine torch light. A ring am made by de
folks standin' 'round in de circle. Deys 'lowed to do anything with dey
hands and head and teeth. Nothin' barred 'cept de knife and de club. Dem
two niggers gits in de ring and Tom he starts quick, and dat new nigger
he starts jus' as quick. Dat 'sprise Tom and when dey comes togedder it
like two bulls--kersmash--it sounds like dat. Den it am hit and kick and
bite and butt anywhere and any place for to best de udder. De one on de
bottom bites knees or anything him can do. Dat's de way it go for half
de hour.

"Fin'ly dat new nigger gits Tom in de stomach with he knee and a lick
side de jaw at de same time and down go Tom and de udder nigger jumps on
him with both feets, den straddle him and hits with right, left, right,
left, right, side Tom's head. Dere Tom lay, makin' no 'sistance.
Everybody am saysin', 'Tom have met he match, him am done.' Both am
bleedin' and am awful sight. Well, dat new nigger 'laxes for to git he
wind and den Tom, quick like de flash, flips him off and jump to he feet
and befo' dat new nigger could git to he feet, Tom kicks him in de
stomach, 'gain and 'gain. Dat nigger's body start to quaver and he massa
say, 'Dat 'nough.' Dat de clostest Tom ever come to gittin' whupped what
I's know of.

"I becomes a runaway nigger short time after dat fight. De war am
started den for 'bout a year, or somethin' like dat, and de Fed'rals am
north of us. I hears de niggers talk 'bout it, and 'bout runnin' 'way to
freedom. I thinks and thinks 'bout gittin' freedom, and I's gwine run
off. Den I thinks of de patter rollers and what happen if dey cotches me
off de place without de pass. Den I thinks of some joyment sich as de
corn huskin' and de fights and de singin' and I don't know what to do. I
tells you one singin' but I can't sing it:

  "'De moonlight, a shinin' star,
  De big owl hootin' in de tree;
  O, bye, my baby, ain't you gwineter sleep,
  A-rockin' on my knee?

  "'Bye, my honey baby,
  A-rockin' on my knee,
  Baby done gone to sleep,
  Owl hush hootin' in de tree.

  "'She gone to sleep, honey baby sleep,
  A-rockin' on my, a-rockin' on my knee.'

"Now, back to de freedom. One night 'bout ten niggers run away. De next
day we'uns hears nothin', so I says to myself, 'De patters don't cotch
dem.' Den I makes up my mind to go and I leaves with de chunk of meat
and cornbread and am on my way, half skeert to death. I sho' has de eyes
open and de ears forward, watchin' for de patters. I steps off de road
in de night, at sight of anything, and in de day I takes to de woods. It
takes me two days to make dat trip and jus' once de patters pass me by.
I am in de thicket watchin' dem and I's sho' dey gwine search dat
thicket, 'cause dey stops and am a-talkin' and lookin' my way. Dey
stands dere for a li'l bit and den one comes my way. Lawd A-mighty! Dat
sho' look like de end, but dat man stop and den look and look. Den he
pick up somethin' and goes back. It am a bottle and dey all takes de
drink and rides on. I's sho' in de sweat and I don't tarry dere long.

"De Yanks am camped nere Bellfound and dere's where I gits to. 'Magine
my 'sprise when I finds all de ten runaway niggers am dere, too. Dat am
on a Sunday and on de Monday, de Yanks puts us on de freight train and
we goes to Stevenson, in Alabama. Dere, us put to work buildin'
breastworks. But after de few days, I gits sent to de headquarters at
Nashville, in Tennessee.

"I's water toter dere for de army and dere am no fightin' at first but
'fore long dey starts de battle. Dat battle am a 'sperience for me. De
noise am awful, jus' one steady roar of de guns and de cannons. De
window glass in Nashville am all shoke out from de shakement of de
cannons. Dere am dead mens all over de ground and lots of wounded and
some cussin' and some prayin'. Some am moanin' and dis and dat one cry
for de water and, God A-mighty, I don't want any sich 'gain. Dere am
men carryin' de dead off da field, but dey can't keep up with de
cannons. I helps bury de dead and den I gits sent to Murphysboro and
dere it am jus' de same.

"You knows when Abe Lincoln am shot? Well, I's in Nashville den and it
am near de end of de war and I am standin' on Broadway Street talkin'
with de sergeant when up walk a man and him shakes hands with me and
says, 'I's proud to meet a brave, young fellow like you.' Dat man am
Andrew Johnson and him come to be president after Abe's dead.

"I stays in Nashville when de war am over and I marries Tennessee House
in 1875 and she died July 10th, 1936. Dat make 61 year dat we'uns am
togedder. Her old missy am now livin' in Arlington Heights, right here
in Fort Worth and her name am Mallard and she come from Tennessee, too.

"I comes here from Tennessee 51 year ago and at fust I farms and den I
works for de packin' plants till dey lets me out, 'cause I's too old for
to do 'nough work for dem.

"I has eight boys and three girls, dat make eleven chillen, and dey
makin' scatterment all over de country so I's alone in my old age. I has
dat $17.00 de month pension what I gits from de State.

"Dat am de end of de road.
