"Mama was named Anna Noles. Papa named Milias Noles. She belong to the
Whitakers and he belong to Gibbs. Noles bought them both. They was both
sold. Mother was born in Athens, papa somewhere in Kentucky. Their
owners, the Noles, come to Aberdeen, Mississippi.

"Grandma, papa's mama, was killed with a battling stick. She was a
slender woman, very tall and pretty, papa told me. She was at the
spring, washing. They cut a tree off and make a smooth stump. They used
a big tree stump for battling. They had paddles, wide as this (two hands
wide--eight or ten inches) with rounded-off handle, smoothed so slick.
They wet and soap the clothes, put em on that block-tree stump and beat
em. Rub boards was not heard of in them days. They soaked the clothes,
boiled and rinsed a heap. They done good washing. I heard em say the
clothes come white as snow from the lye soap they used. They made the
soap. They had hard soap and soft soap, made from ashes dripped and meat
skins. They used tallow and mutton suet too. I don't know what was said,
but I recken she didn't please her mistress--Mrs. Callie Gibbs. She
struck her in the small part of her back and broke it. She left her at
the spring. Somebody went to get water and seen her there. They took her
to the house but she finally died. Grandpa was dead then. I recken they
got scared to keep papa round then and sold him.

"I was born first year of the surrender. Moster Noles told them they was
free. They didn't give them a thing. They was glad they was free. They
didn't want to be in slavery; it was too tied down to suit em. They
lived about places, do little work where they found it.

"We dodged the Ku Klux. One night they was huntin' a man and come to the
wrong house. They nearly broke mama's arm pullin' her outen our house.
They give us some trouble coming round. We was scared of em. We dodged
em all the time.

"I was married and had a child eight years old fore I come to Arkansas.
I come to Brinkley first. I was writing to friends. They had immigrated,
so we immigrated here and been here ever since. When I come here there
was two big stores and a little one. A big sawmill--nothing but woods
and wild animals. It wasn't no hard times then. We had a plenty to live
on.

"My husband was a saw mill hand and a railroad builder. He worked on the
section. I nursed, washed, ironed, cooked, cleaned folks houses. We done
about right smart. I could do right smart now if white folks hire me.

"The night my husband died somebody stole nearly every chicken I had. He
died last week. We found out it was two colored men. I ain't needed no
support till now. My husband made us a good living long as he was able
to go. We raised a family. He was a tolerably dark sort of man. My girls
bout his color."

The two grown girls were "scouring" the floor. Both of them said they
were married and lived somewhere else.



