"I was born in slavery times in Clark County, Alabama. Clover Hill was
the county seat.

"Elias Campbell was old master. I know the first time I ever saw any
plums, old master brought 'em. I 'member that same as yesterday.

"I 'member the same as if 'twas yesterday when the Yankees come. We
chillun would hide behind the door. Had on blue suits with brass
buttons. So you see I'm no baby.

"I 'member my mother and the other folks would go up to the big house
and help make molasses. Didn't 'low us chillun to go but we'd slip up
there anyway.

"Old missis' name Miss Annis. She was good to us.

"I didn't do nothin' but play around in the yard and tote wood. Used to
tote water from the Wood Spring. Had a spring called Wood Spring.

"My mother was the cook and my grandma was the spinner. I used to weave
after freedom.

"I know the Yankees come in there and got a lot of fodder. They was
drivin' a lot of cows. We chillun would be scared of 'em--mama would be
at the big house.

"Mama belonged to the Campbells and papa belonged to Davis Solomon, and
I know every Christmas they let him come to see mama, and he'd bring me
and my sister a red dress buttoned in the back. I 'member it same as if
'twas yesterday 'cause I was crazy 'bout them red dresses.

"I used to hear the folks talkin' 'bout patrollers. Yes ma'am, I heered
that song

  'Run nigger run
   Paddyrollers will ketch you
   Jes' 'fore day.'

I know you've heered that song.

"I heered papa talk about how he was sold. He say the overseer so mean
he run off in the woods and eat blackberries for a week.

"I guess we had plenty to eat. I know mama used to fetch us somethin' to
eat from the house. Old missis give it to her. I know I was glad to get
it.

"When the people was freed they was so glad they went from house to
house and prayed and give thanks to the Lord.

"Our folks stayed right there and worked on the shares.

"I never went to school but about two weeks. My papa was hard workin'.
Other folks would let their chillun rest but he wouldn't let his chillun
rest. He sure did work us hard.

"You know in them days people moved 'round so much they didn't have time
to keep up no remembrance 'bout their ages. We didn't have no time to
see 'bout no ages--had to work. That's the truth."