"I don't know when I was born or 'zackly how old I is, but I was born in
South Carolina and come here before the War.

"I belonged to Wiley Mosley and he brought me and my mother and my
sister here to Arkansas. I don't 'member it at all 'cause I was a baby,
but I know what Wiley Mosley and my mother told me.

"Settled in Redland Township. That's what they called it. He bought a
plantation there. There was three brothers come to this country and they
didn't live very far from each other.

"I 'member hearin' 'em talk 'bout the War and one time I heered the guns
a poppin'. They said they was just passin' through. I was just a small
girl but I 'member it. I seed the Yankees too. I 'member they'd come up
in the yard on hosses and jump down and go in the smokehouse and take
the meat and go to the dairy house and get the milk.

"Old master was gone to the War. I 'member when he was gwine and I
'member when he come back. Old missis said he was up in Missouri. Got
shot right through the foot once. I know he come home and stayed 'til he
was well, then he went back. I don't know how long he stayed but he went
back--I know that. And he come back after the War--I 'member that.

"I 'member one time when I upset the cradle. Miss Jane wouldn't 'low me
to take the baby up but I rocked the cradle. And one time I reckon I
rocked it too hard and it turned over. Miss Jane heard it time it hit
the floor and she come runnin'. I was under the house by that time but
she called me out and whipped me and told me to get back in the house. I
know I didn't turn it over no more.

"The Yankees never said nothin' to me--talked to my mother though, and
old mis'.

"They said they was fightin' to free the niggers. There was a boy on the
place and while old master was gone to war, he'd just go and come and
get the news. He didn't do that when old master was home. I know he
brought the news when peace declared. Patrollers got him one night.

"I 'member when peace declared ever'body went around shoutin' and
hollerin', 'The niggers is free, the niggers is free!'

"Our folks stayed there on the place right smart while after freedom. I
'member I was gwine out to the field and Woodson, he was the baby I
upset, he wanted to go along and wanted me to tote him and I know old
master said, 'Put him down and let him walk.'

"They told me I was twenty when I was married--the white folks told me.
I know my mother asked how old I was and they said I was 'bout twenty. I
'member it well enough.

"I never went to school but I knowed my ABC's and could read some in the
first reader. I ain't forgot about it. I thinks about it sometimes.

"The biggest work I has done is farm work.

"I've had nine chillun and raised all of 'em but one."


NOTE:

Eliza lives with her son who is well educated and a retired city mail
carrier and he is now sending three children to the A.M.& N. College
here.

