


"I was born in Edgefield County, S.C. (now called Saluda County) in
1857. My father and mother was Bill and Mary Kinard who was slaves of
John Kinard. The year I was born, I allus heard say, there was a big
fire near Columbia, S. C. It started in the woods near the river, spread
over all parts there and the people, womens with new-born infants, had
to leave in a hurry, going back from the fire and crossing the river, to
Edgefield County. I 'member there was a big fire in Prosperity back in
about 1875.

"I was a girl in slavery, worked in the fields from the time I could
work at all, and was whipped if I didn't work. I worked hard. I was born
on John Bedenbaugh's place; I was put up on the block and sold when a
girl, but I cried and held tight to my mistress's dress, who felt sorry
for me and took me back with her. She was Mrs. Sarah Bedenbaugh, as fine
a woman as ever lived.

"Marse Bedenbaugh had a 5-horse farm, and about 20 slaves. We didn't
have time to teach them to read and write; never went to church--never
went to any school. After the war some started a nigger school and a
brush-arbor church for niggers.

"When the Yankees went through their soldiers stole everthing, all
horses and supplies. The soldiers stopped at places, and like the
soldiers who come home foot-sore, they was lousy and dirty. Our soldiers
come with canteen shoes [TN: 'and' was crossed out in the original] and
old blankets swung on their backs and shoulders. The people would send
wagons out to meet them and bring them in, some of them could hardly
walk. The Yankee soldiers would take our rations at our gates and eat
them up. They would blow bugles at we children and beat drums. Our old
Missus would take victuals to them.

"The paterollers down there where we lived was Geo. Harris, Lamb Crew,
Jim Jones, and Theo. Merchant. They bothered us lots. On the first day
of the month, some was put up on the whipping block and whipped with an
oak paddle with holes in it to make blisters; then de blisters were cut
open with cowhide whips.

"When freedom come, all slaves went to some place to get work. My father
give me six cuts a day to work in the house to spin the yarn. My
mistress used to have me pick up de sheckles for her when she was making
a homespun dress. In the winter time we had homespuns, too, but
sometimes had flannel underwear. I helped at the corn mill, too, always
went there and tote a half bushel corn many days. The mill belonged to
Capt. McNary. I worked hard, plowed, cut wheat, split cord wood, and
other work just like a man.

"When any niggers died they had funerals like they do now, 'cept the
pallbearers den would sing. They carried the bodies in wagons, and the
preacher would say words while they was going to the grave.

"When the soldiers was here, I 'member how they would sing:

  "I'm all de way from Georgia,
  I'm all the way to fight,
  I left my good old mother,
  To come here to fight."

  "Joe Bowers, Joe Bowers,
  He had another wife,
  He's all de way from Missouri,
  To come here to fight."

"I didn't like slavery. I'd rather live like now.

"I thought Abraham Lincoln was a big man, a fine man. I thought Jeff
Davis was all right. I don't know nothing about Booker Washington."

  =Source:= Lucy Gallman (80), Newberry, S.C.
          Interviewer: G. Leland Summer, 1707 Lindsey St,
                        Newberry, S.C.
