
 Place of birth: On the Holt plantation, in Muscogee
  County, near Columbus, Georgia.

  Date of birth: About 1853.

 "I was a small girl when the Civil War broke out, but I
remember it distinctly. I also remember the whisperings among the
slaves--their talking of the possibility of freedom.

"My father was a very large, powerful man. During his master's absence,
in '63 or '64, a colored foreman on the Hines Holt place once undertook
to whip him; but my father wouldn't allow him to do it. This foreman
then went off and got five big buck Negroes to help him whip father, but
all six of them couldn't 'out-man' my daddy! Then this foreman shot my
daddy with a shot-gun, inflicting wounds from which he never fully
recovered.

"In '65, another Negro foreman whipped one of my little brothers. This
foreman was named Warren. His whipping my brother made me mad and when,
a few days later, I saw some men on horseback whom I took to be Yankees,
I ran to them and told them about Warren--a common Negro slave--whipping
my brother. And they said, 'well, we will see Warren about that.' But
Warren heard them and took to his heels! Yes, sir, he flew from home,
and he didn't come back for a week! Yes, sir, I sholy scared that Negro
nearly to death!

"My father's father was a very black, little, full-blooded, African
Negro who could speak only broken English. He had a son named Adam, a
brother of my father, living at Lochapoka, Ala. In 1867, after freedom,
this granpa of mine, who was then living in Macon, Georgia, got mad with
his wife, picked up his feather bed and toted it all the way from Macon
to Lochapoka! Said he was done with grandma and was going to live with
Adam. A few weeks later, however, he came back through Columbus, still
toting his feather bed, returning to grandma in Macon. I reckon he
changed his mind. I don't believe he was over five feet high and we
could hardly understand his talk.

"Since freedom, I have lived in Mississippi and other places, but most
of my life has been spent right in and around Columbus. I have had one
husband and no children. I became a widow about 35 years ago, and I have
since remained one because I find that I can serve God better when I am
not bothered with a Negro man."

Mary Gladdy claims to have never attended school or been privately
taught in her life. And she can't write or even form the letters of the
alphabet, but she gave her interviewer a very convincing demonstration
of her ability to read. When asked how she mastered the art of reading,
she replied: "The Lord revealed it to me."

For more than thirty years, the Lord has been revealing his work, and
many other things, to Mary Gladdy. For more than twenty years, she has
been experiencing "visitations of the spirit". These do not occur with
any degree of regularity, but they do always occur in "the dead hours of
the night" after she has retired, and impel her to rise and write in an
unknown hand. These strange writings of her's now cover eight pages of
letter paper and bear a marked resemblance to crude shorthand notes.
Off-hand, she can "cipher" (interpret or translate) about half of these
strange writings; the other half, however, she can make neither heads
nor tails of except when the spirit is upon her. When the spirit eases
off, she again becomes totally ignorant of the significance of that
mysterious half of her spirit-directed writings.

"Aunt" Mary appears to be very well posted on a number of subjects. She
is unusually familiar with the Bible, and quotes scripture freely and
correctly. She also uses beautiful language, totally void of slang and
Negro jargon, "big" words and labored expressions.

She is a seventh Day Adventist; is not a psychic, but is a rather
mysterious personage. She lives alone, and ekes out a living by taking
in washing. She is of the opinion that "we are now living in the last
days"; that, as she interprets the "signs", the "end of time" is drawing
close. Her conversion to Christianity was the result of a hair-raising
experience with a ghost--about forty years ago, and she has never--from
that day to this--fallen from grace for as "long as a minute".

To know "Aunt" Mary is to be impressed with her utter sincerity and, to
like her. She is very proud of one of her grandmothers, Edie Dennis,
who lived to be 110 years old, and concerning whom a reprint from the
Atlanta Constitution of November 10, 1900, is appended. Her story of
Chuck, and the words of two spirituals and one slave canticle which
"Aunt" Mary sang for her interviewer, are also appended.


  THE STORY OF CHUCK, AS
  TOLD BY MARY GLADDY.


Chuck was a very intelligent and industrious slave, but so religious
that he annoyed his master by doing so much praying, chanting, and
singing.

So, while in a spiteful mood one day, this master sold the Negro to an
infidel. And this infidel, having no respect for religion whatsoever,
beat Chuck unmercifully in an effort to stop him from indulging in his
devotions. But, the more and the harder the infidel owner whipped Chuck,
the more devout and demonstrative the slave became.

Finally, one day, the infidel was stricken ill unto death; the wicked
man felt that his end was near and he was afraid to die. Moreover, his
conscience rebuked him for his cruel treatment of this slave. The family
doctor had given the infidel up: the man apparently had but a few hours
to live. Then, about 8 o'clock at night, the dying man asked his wife to
go down in the slave quarter and ask Chuck if he would come to his
bedside and pray for him.

The white lady went, as requested, and found Chuck on his knees, engaged
in prayer.

"Chuck", she called, "your master is dying and has sent me to beg you to
come and pray for him."

"Why, Maddom", replied Chuck, "I has been praying fer Marster
tonight--already, and I'll gladly go with you."

Chuck then went to his Master's bed side and prayed for him all night,
and the Lord heard Chuck's prayers, and the white man recovered, was
converted, joined the church, and became an evangelist. He also freed
Chuck and made an evangelist of him. Then the two got in a buggy and,
for years, traveled together all over the country, preaching the gospel
and saving souls.

NOTE: Mary Gladdy believes this to be a true story, though she knew
neither the principals involved, nor where nor when they lived and
labored. She says that the story has been "handed down", and she once
saw it printed in, and thus confirmed by, a Negro publication--long
after she had originally heard it.


KEEP THE FIRE BURNING WHILE YOUR SOUL'S FIRED UP.

  Fire, fire, O, keep the fire burning while your soul's fired up.
  O, keep the fire burning while your soul's fired up;
  Never mind what satan says while your soul's fired up.
  You ain't going to learn how to watch and pray,
  Less you keep the fire burning while your soul's fired up.

  Old Satan is a liar and a cunjorer, too;
  If you don't mind, he'll cunjor you;
  Keep the fire burning while your =soul's fired up=.
  Never mind what satan says while, your soul's fired up.

Sung for interviewer by:

  Mary Gladdy, Ex-slave,
  806-1/2 - Sixth Avenue,
  Columbus, Georgia.
  December 17, 1936.


THE GOSPEL TRAIN

  Never seen the like since I've been born,
  The people keep a-coming, and the train's done gone;
  Too late, too late, the train's done gone,
  Too late, sinner, too late, the train's done gone;
  Never seen the like since I've been born,
  The people keep a-coming, and the train's done gone;
  Too late, too late, the train's done gone.

  Went down into the valley to watch and pray,
  My soul got happy and I stayed all day;
  Too late, too late, the train's done gone;
  Too late, sinner, too late, the train's done gone;
  Never seen the like since I've been born,
  The people keep a-coming and the train's done gone.
  Too late, too late, the train's done gone.


Sung for interviewer by:

  Mary Gladdy, ex-slave,
  806-1/2 - 6th Avenue,
  Columbus, Georgia,
  December 17, 1936


OLD SLAVE CANTICLE.

  My sister, I feels 'im, my sister I feels 'im;
  All night long I've been feelin 'im;
  Jest befoe day, I feels 'im, jest befoe day I feels 'im;
  The sperit, I feels 'im, the sperit I feels 'im!

  My brother, I feels 'im, my brother, I feels 'im;
  All night long I've been feelin 'im,
  Jest befoe day, I feels 'im, jest befoe day, I feel 'im;
  The sperit, I feels 'im!

According to Mary Gladdy, ex-slave, 806-1/2 - 6th Avenue, Columbus,
Georgia, it was customary among slaves during the Civil War period to
secretly gather in their cabins two or three nights each week and hold
prayer and experience meetings. A large, iron pot was always placed
against the cabin door--sideways, to keep the sound of their voices from
"escaping" or being heard from the outside. Then, the slaves would sing,
pray, and relate experiences all night long. Their great, soul-hungering
desire was freedom--not that they loved the Yankees or hated their
masters, but merely longed to be free and hated the institution of
slavery.

Practically always, every Negro attendant of these meetings felt the
spirit of the Lord "touch him (or her) just before day". Then, all would
arise, shake hands around, and begin to chant the canticle above quoted.
This was also a signal for adjournment, and, after chanting 15 or 20
minutes, all would shake hands again and go home--confident in their
hearts that freedom was in the offing for them.
