


I was a slave before and during the Civil War. I am 87 years old. I was
born Sept. 16, 1850. I was born in Orange County, North Carolina near
Hillsboro. At that time Durham was just a platform at the station and no
house there whatever. The platform was lighted with a contraption shaped
like a basket and burning coal that gave off a blaze. There were holes
in this metal basket for the cinders to fall through.

I belonged to a man named Bob Hall, he was a widower. He had three
sons, Thomas, Nelson, and Lambert. He died when I was eight years old
and I was put on the block and sold in Nelson Hall's yard by the son of
Bob Hall. I saw my brother and sister sold on this same plantation. My
mother belonged to the Halls, and father belonged to the Glenns. They
sold me away from my father and mother and I was carried to the state of
Kentucky. I was bought by a Negro speculator by the name of Henry long
who lived not far from Hurdles Mill in Person County. I was not allowed
to tell my mother and father goodbye. I was bought and sold three times
in one day.

My father's time was hired out and as he knew a trade he had by working
overtime saved up a considerable amount of money. After the speculator,
Henry Long, bought me, mother went to father and pled with him to buy me
from him and let the white folks hire me out. No slave could own a
slave. Father got the consent and help of his owners to buy me and they
asked Long to put me on the block again. Long did so and named his price
but when he learned who had bid me off he backed down. Later in the day
he put me on the block and named another price much higher than the
price formerly set. He was asked by the white folks to name his price
for his bargain and he did so. I was again put on the auction block and
father bought me in, putting up the cash. Long then flew into a rage and
cursed my father saying, 'you damn black son of a bitch, you think you
are white do you? Now just to show you are black, I will not let you
have your son at any price.' Father knew it was all off, mother was
frantic but there was nothing they could do about it. They had to stand
and see the speculator put me on his horse behind him and ride away
without allowing either of them to tell me goodbye. I figure I was sold
three times in one day, as the price asked was offered in each instance.
Mother was told under threat of a whupping not to make any outcry when I
was carried away. He took me to his home, but on the way he stopped for
refreshments, at a plantation, and while he was eating and drinking, he
put me into a room where two white women were spinning flax. I was given
a seat across the room from where they were working. After I had sat
there awhile wondering where I was going and thinking about mother and
home, I went to one of the women and asked, 'Missus when will I see my
mother again?' She replied, I don't know child, go and sit down. I went
back to my seat and as I did so both the women stopped spinning for a
moment, looked at each other, and one of them remarked. "Almighty God,
this slavery business is a horrible thing. Chances are this boy will
never see his mother again." This remark nearly killed me, as I began to
fully realize my situation. Long, the Negro trader, soon came back, put
me on his horse and finished the trip to his home. He kept me at his
home awhile and then traded me to a man named William Moore who lived in
Person County. Moore at this time was planning to move to Kentucky which
he soon did, taking me with him. My mother found out by the "Grapevine
telegraph" that I was going to be carried to Kentucky. She got
permission and came to see me before they carried me off. When she
started home I was allowed to go part of the way with her but they sent
two Negro girls with us to insure my return. We were allowed to talk
privately, but while we were doing so, the two girls stood a short
distance away and watched as the marster told them when they left that
if I escaped they would be whipped every day until I was caught. When
the time of parting came and I had to turn back, I burst out crying
loud. I was so weak from sorrow I could not walk, and the two girls who
were with me took me by each arm and led me along half carrying me.

This man Moore carried me and several other slaves to Kentucky. We
traveled by train by way of Nashville, Tenn. My thoughts are not
familiar with the happenings of this trip but I remember that we walked
a long distance at one place on the trip from one depot to another.

We finally reached Kentucky and Moore stopped at his brother's
plantation until he could buy one, then we moved on it. My marster was
named William Moore and my missus was named Martha Whitfield Moore. It
was a big plantation and he hired a lot of help and had white tenants
besides the land he worked with slaves. There were only six slaves used
as regular field hands during his first year in Kentucky.

The food was generally common. Hog meat and cornbread most all the
time. Slaves got biscuits only on Sunday morning. Our clothes were poor
and I worked barefooted most of the time, winter and summer. No books,
papers or anything concerning education was allowed the slaves by his
rules and the customs of these times.

Marster Moore had four children among whom was one boy about my age.
The girls were named Atona, Beulah, and Minnie, and the boy was named
Crosby. He was mighty brilliant. We played together. He was the only
white boy there, and he took a great liking to me, and we loved each
devotedly. Once in an undertone he asked me how would I like to have an
education. I was overjoyed at the suggestion and he at once began to
teach me secretly. I studied hard and he soon had me so I could read and
write well. I continued studying and he continued teaching me. He
furnished me books and slipped all the papers he could get to me and I
was the best educated Negro in the community without anyone except the
slaves knowing what was going on.

All the slaves on marster's plantation lived the first year we spent in
Kentucky in a one room house with one fireplace. There was a dozen or
more who all lived in this one room house. Marster built himself a large
house having seven rooms. He worked his slaves himself and never had any
overseers. We worked from sun to sun in the fields and then worked at
the house after getting in from the fields as long as we could see. I
have never seen a patteroller but when I left the plantation in slavery
time I got a pass. I have never seen a jail for slaves but I have seen
slaves whipped and I was whipped myself. I was whipped particularly
about a saddle I left out in the night after using it during the day. My
flesh was cut up so bad that the scars are on me to this day.

We were not allowed to have prayer meetings, but we went to the white
folks church to services sometimes. There were no looms, mills, or shops
on the plantation at Marster Moore's. I kept the name of Glenn through
all the years as Marster Moore did not change his slaves names to his
family name. My mother was named Martha Glenn and father was named Bob
Glenn.

I was in the field when I first heard of the Civil War. The woman who
looked after Henry Hall and myself (both slaves) told me she heard
marster say old Abraham Lincoln was trying to free the niggers. Marster
finally pulled me up and went and joined the Confederate Army. Kentucky
split and part joined the North and part the South. The war news kept
slipping through of success for first one side then the other. Sometimes
marster would come home, spend a few days and then go again to the war.
It seemed he influenced a lot of men to join the southern army, among
them was a man named Enoch Moorehead. Moorehead was killed in a few days
after he joined the southern army.

Marster Moore fell out with a lot of his associates in the army and
some of them who were from the same community became his bitter enemies.
Tom Foushee was one of them. Marster became so alarmed over the threats
on his life made by Foushee and others that he was afraid to stay in his
own home at night, and he built a little camp one and one half miles
from his home and he and missus spent their nights there on his visits
home. Foushee finally came to the great house one night heavily armed,
came right on into the house and inquired for marster. We told him
marster was away. Foushee lay down on the floor and waited a long time
for him. Marster was at the little camp but we would not tell where he
was.

Foushee left after spending most of the night at marster's. As he went
out into the yard, when leaving, marster's bull dog grawled at him and
he shot him dead.

Marster went to Henderson, Kentucky, the County seat of Henderson
County, and surrendered to the Federal Army and took the Oath of
Allegiance. Up to that time I had seen a few Yankees. They stopped now
and then at marster's and got their breakfast. They always asked about
buttermilk, they seemed to be very fond of it. They were also fond of
ham, but we had the ham meat buried in the ground, this was about the
close of the war. A big army of Yankees came through a few months later
and soon we heard of the surrender. A few days after this marster told
me to catch two horses that we had to go to Dickenson which was the
County seat of Webster County. On the way to Dickenson he said to me,
'Bob, did you know you are free and Lincoln has freed you? You are as
free as I am.' We went to the Freedmen's Bureau and went into the
office. A Yankee officer looked me over and asked marster my name, and
informed me I was free, and asked me whether or not I wanted to keep
living with Moore. I did not know what to do, so I told him yes. A fixed
price of seventy-five dollars and board was then set as the salary I
should receive per year for my work. The Yankees told me to let him know
if I was not paid as agreed.

I went back home and stayed a year. During the year I hunted a lot at
night and thoroughly enjoyed being free. I took my freedom by degrees
and remained obedient and respectful, but still wondering and thinking
of what the future held for me. After I retired at night I made plan
after plan and built aircastles as to what I would do. At this time I
formed a great attachment for the white man, Mr. Atlas Chandler, with
whom I hunted. He bought my part of the game we caught and favored me in
other ways. Mr. Chandler had a friend, Mr. Dewitt Yarborough, who was an
adventurer, and trader, and half brother to my ex-marster, Mr. Moore,
with whom I was then staying. He is responsible for me taking myself
into my own hands and getting out of feeling I was still under
obligations to ask my marster or missus when I desired to leave the
premises. Mr. Yarborough's son was off at school at a place called
Kiloh, Kentucky, and he wanted to carry a horse to him and also take
along some other animals for trading purposes. He offered me a new pair
of pants to make the trip for him and I accepted the job. I delivered
the horse to his son and started for home. On the way back I ran into
Uncle Squire Yarborough who once belonged to Dewitt Yarborough. He
persuaded me to go home with him and go with him to a wedding in Union
County, Kentucky. The wedding was twenty miles away and we walked the
entire distance. It was a double wedding, two couples were married.
Georgianna Hawkins was married to George Ross and Steve Carter married a
woman whose name I do not remember. This was in the winter during the
Christmas Holidays and I stayed in the community until about the first
of January, then I went back home. I had been thinking for several days
before I went back home as to just what I must tell Mr. Moore and as to
how he felt about the matter, and what I would get when I got home. In
my dilema I almost forgot I was free.

I got home at night and my mind and heart was full but I was surprised
at the way he treated me. He acted kind and asked me if I was going to
stay with him next year. I was pleased. I told him, yes sir! and then I
lay down and went to sleep. He had a boss man on his plantation then and
next morning he called me, but I just couldn't wake. I seemed to be in a
trance or something, I had recently lost so much sleep. He called me the
second time and still I di [HW: d] not get up. Then he came in and
spanked my head. I jumped up and went to work feeding the stock and
splitting wood for the day's cooking and fires. I then went in and ate
my breakfast. Mr. Moore told me to hitch a team of horses to a wagon and
go to a neighbors five miles away for a load of hogs. I refused to do
so. They called me into the house and asked me what I was going to do
about it. I said I do not know. As I said that I stepped out of the
door and left. I went straight to the county seat and hired to Dr.
George Rasby in Webster County for one hundred dollars per year. I
stayed there one year. I got uneasy in Kentucky. The whites treated the
blacks awful bad so I decided to go to Illinois as I thought a Negro
might have a better chance there, it being a northern state. I was
kindly treated and soon began to save money, but all through the years
there was a thought that haunted me in my dreams and in my waking hours,
and this thought was of my mother, whom I had not seen or heard of in
many years. Finally one cold morning in early December I made a vow that
I was going to North Carolina and see my mother if she was still living.
I had plenty of money for the trip. I wrote the postmaster in Roxboro,
North Carolina, asking him to inform my mother I was still living, and
telling him the circumstances, mailing a letter at the same time telling
her I was still alive but saying nothing of my intended visit to her. I
left Illinois bound for North Carolina on December 15th and in a few
days I was at my mother's home. I tried to fool them. There were two men
with me and they called me by a ficticious name, but when I shook my
mother's hand I held it a little too long and she suspicioned something
still she held herself until she was more sure. When she got a chance
she came to me and said ain't you my child? Tell me ain't you my child
whom I left on the road near Mr. Moore's before the war? I broke down
and began to cry. Mother nor father did not know me, but mother
suspicioned I was her child. Father had a few days previously remarked
that he did not want to die without seeing his son once more. I could
not find language to express my feeling. I did not know before I came
home whether my parents were dead or alive. This Christmas I spent in
the county and state of my birth and childhood; with mother, father and
freedom was the happiest period of my entire life, because those who
were torn apart in bondage and sorrow several years previous were now
united in freedom and happiness.

EH
