
Alice Green's address led to a tumble down shack set in a small yard
which was enclosed by a sagging poultry wire fence. The gate, off its
hinges, was propped across the entrance.

The call, "Alice!" brought the prompt response, "Here I is. Jus' push de
gate down and come on in." When a little rat terrier ran barking out of
the house to challenge the visitor, Alice hobbled to the door. "Come
back here and be-have yourself" she addressed the dog, and turning to
the interviewer, she said: "Lady, dat dog won't bite nothin' but
somepin' t'eat--when he kin git it." Don't pay him no 'tention. Won't
you come in and have a seat?"

Alice has a light brown complexion and bright blue eyes. She wore a
soiled print dress, and a dingy stocking cap partly concealed her white
hair. Boards were laid across the seat of what had been a cane-bottomed
chair, in which she sat and rocked.

Asked if she would talk of her early life the old Negress replied: "Good
Lord! Honey, I done forgot all I ever knowed 'bout dem days. I was born
in Clarke County. Milly and Charley Green was my mammy and pappy and dey
b'longed to Marse Daniel Miller. Mammy, she was born and raised in
Clarke County but my pappy, he come from southwest Georgia. I done
forgot de town whar he was brung up. Dere was seven of us chillun: me
and Viola, Lula, Fannie, Rene, Bob, and Isaac. Chillun what warn't big
'nough to wuk in de fields or in de house stayed 'round de yard and
played in de sand piles wid de white chillun.

"Slaves lived in mud-daubed log huts what had chimblies made out of
sticks and mud. Lordy Honey! Dem beds was made wid big high posties and
strung wid cords for springs. Folks never had no wire bedsprings dem
days. Our mattresses was wheat straw put in ticks made out of coarse
cloth what was wove on de loom right dar on de plantation.

"I don't know nothin' 'bout what my grandmammies done in slav'ry time. I
never seed but one of 'em, and don't 'member much 'bout her. I was jus'
so knotty headed I never tuk in what went on 'cause I never 'spected to
be axed to tell 'bout dem days.

"Money! Oh-h-h, no Ma'am! I never seed no money 'til I was a great big
gal. My white folks was rich and fed us good. Dey raised lots of hogs
and give us plenty of bread and meat wid milk and butter and all sorts
of vegetables. Marster had one big garden and dere warn't nobody had
more good vegetables den he fed to his slaves. De cookin' was done in
open fireplaces and most all de victuals was biled or fried. Us had all
de 'possums, squirrels, rabbits, and fish us wanted cause our marster
let de mens go huntin' and fishin' lots.

"Us jus' wore common clothes. Winter time dey give us dresses made out
of thick homespun cloth. De skirts was gathered on to tight fittin'
waisties. Us wore brass toed brogan shoes in winter, but in summer
Niggers went bar'foots. Us jus' wore what us could ketch in summer. By
dat time our winter dresses had done wore thin and us used 'em right on
through de hot weather.

"Marse Daniel Miller, he was some kinder good to Mammy, and Miss Susan
was good to us too. Now Honey, somehow I jus' cain't 'member deir
chilluns names no more. And I played in de sand piles all day long wid
'em too.

"Oh-h-h! Dat was a great big old plantation, and when all dem Niggers
got out in de fields wid horses and wagons, it looked lak a picnic
ground; only dem Niggers was in dat field to wuk and dey sho' did have
to wuk.

"Marster had a carriage driver to drive him and Ole Miss 'round and to
take de chillun to school. De overseer, he got de Niggers up 'fore day
and dey had done et deir breakfast, 'tended to de stock, and was in de
field by sunup and he wuked 'em 'til sundown. De mens didn't do no wuk
atter dey got through tendin' to de stock at night, but Mammy and lots
of de other 'omans sot up and spun and wove 'til 'leven or twelve
o'clock lots of nights.

"My pappy was a man what b'lieved in havin' his fun and he would run off
to see de gals widout no pass. Once when he slipped off dat way de
patterollers sicked dem nigger hounds on him and when dey cotched him
dey most beat him to death; he couldn't lay on his back for a long time.

"If dey had jails, I didn't know nothin' 'bout 'em. De patterollers wid
deir nigger hounds made slaves b'have deirselfs widout puttin' 'em in no
jails. I never seed no Niggers sold, but Mammy said her and her whole
fambly was sold on de block to de highes' bidder and dat was when Ole
Marster got us.

"Mammy, she was de cook up at de big house, and when de white chillun
come back from school in de atternoon she would ax 'em to show her how
to read a little book what she carried 'round in her bosom all de time,
and to tell her de other things dey had larn't in school dat day. Dey
larned her how to read and write, and atter de War was over Mammy
teached school and was a granny 'oman (midwife) too.

"Dey made us go to church on Sundays at de white folks church 'cause
dere warn't no church for slaves on de plantation. Us went to Sunday
School too. Mammy jined de white folks church and was baptized by de
white preacher. He larnt us to read de Bible, but on some of de
plantations slaves warn't 'lowed to larn how to read and write. I didn't
have no favorite preacher nor song neither, but Mammy had one song what
she sung lots. It was 'bout 'Hark from de Tombs a Doleful Sound.' I
never seed nobody die and I never went to no buryin' durin' slav'ry
time, so I cain't tell nothin' 'bout things lak dat.

"Lordy Honey! How could dem Niggers run off to de North when dem
patterollers and deir hounds was waitin' to run 'em down and beat 'em
up? Now some of de slaves on other places might have found some way to
pass news 'round but not on Ole Marster's place. You sho' had to have a
pass 'fore you could leave dat plantation and he warn't goin' to give
you no pass jus' for foolishment. I never heared tell of no uprisin's
twixt white folks and Niggers but dey fussed a-plenty. Now days when
folks gits mad, dey jus' hauls off and kills one another.

"Atter slaves got through deir wuk at night, dey was so tired dey jus'
went right off to bed and to sleep. Dey didn't have to wuk on Sadday
atter dinner, and dat night dey would pull candy, dance, and frolic 'til
late in de night. Dey had big times at cornshuckin's and log rollin's.
My pappy, he was a go-gitter; he used to stand up on de corn and whoop
and holler, and when he got a drink of whiskey in him he went hog wild.
Dere was allus big eatin's when de corn was all shucked.

"Christmas warn't much diffunt from other times. Us chillun had a heap
of fun a-lookin' for Santa Claus. De old folks danced, quilted, and
pulled candy durin' de Christmastime. Come New Year's Day, dey all had
to go back to wuk.

"What for you wants to know what I played when I was a little gal? Dat
was a powerful long time ago. Us played in de sand piles, jumped rope,
played hide and seek and Old Mother Hubbard."

At this time a little girl, who lives with Alice, asked for a piece of
bread. She got up and fed the child, then said: "Come in dis here room.
I wants to show you whar I burned my bed last night tryin' to kill de
chinches: dey most eats me up evvy night." In the bedroom an oil lamp
was burning. The bed and mattress showed signs of fire. The mattress
tick was split from head to foot and cotton spilling out on the floor.
"Dat's whar I sleep," declared Alice. The atmosphere of the bedroom was
heavy with nauseous odors and the interviewer hastened to return to the
front of the house desiring to get out of range of the chinch-ridden
bed. Before there was time to resume conversation the terrier grabbed
the bread from the child's hand and in retaliation the child bit the dog
on the jaw and attempted to retrieve the bread. Alice snatched off her
stocking cap and beat at the dog with it. "Git out of here, Biddy. I
done told you and told you 'bout eatin' dat chile's somepin t'eat. I
don't know why Miz. Woods gimme dis here dog no how, 'cause she knows I
can't feed it and it's jus' plum starvin'. Go on out, I say.

"Lordy! Lady, dar's one of dem chinches from my bed a-crawlin' over your
pretty white dress. Ketch him quick, 'fore he bites you." Soon the
excitement was over and Alice resumed her story.

"Dey tuk mighty good care of slaves when dey got sick. Dey had to,
'cause slaves was propity and to let a slave die was to lose money. Ole
Miss, she looked atter de 'omans and Ole Marster, he had de doctor for
de mens. I done forgot most of what dey made us take. I know dey made us
wear assfiddy (asafetida) sacks 'round our necks, and eat gumgoo wax.
Dey rubbed our heads wid camphor what was mixed wid whiskey. Old folks
used to conjure folks when dey got mad at 'em. Dey went in de woods and
got certain kinds of roots and biled 'em wid spider webs, and give 'em
de tea to drink.

"One day us chillun was playin' in de sand pile and us looked up and
seed a passel of yankees comin'. Dere was so many of 'em it was lak a
flock of bluebirds. 'Fore dey left some folks thought dey was more lak
blue devils. My mammy was in de kitchen and Ole Miss said: 'Look out of
dat window, Milly; de yankees is comin' for sho' and dey's goin' to free
you and take you and your chillun 'way from me. Don't leave me! Please
don't leave me, Milly!' Dem yankees swarmed into de yard. Dey opened de
smokehouse, chicken yard, corncrib, and evvything on de place. Dey tuk
what dey wanted and told us de rest was ours to do what us pleased wid.
Dey said us was free and dat what was on de plantation b'longed to us,
den dey went on off and us never seed 'em no more.

"When de War was over Ole Miss cried and cried and begged us not to
leave her, but us did. Us went to wuk for a man on halves. I had to wuk
in de field 'til I was a big gal, den I went to wuk for rich white
folks. I ain't never wuked for no pore white folks in my whole life.

"It was a long time 'fore Niggers could buy land for deirselfs 'cause
dey had to make de money to buy it wid. I couldn't rightly say when
schools was set up for de Niggers. It was all such a long time ago, and
I never tuk it in nohow.

"I don't recollect when I married George Huff or what I wore dat day.
Didn't live wid him long nohow. I warn't goin' to live wid no man what
sot 'round and watched me wuk. Mammy had done larnt me how to wuk, and I
didn't know nothin' else but to go ahead and wuk for a livin'. I don't
know whar George is. He might be dead for all I know; if he ain't, he
ought to be. I got three chillun. Two of 'em is gals, Lizzie and Lila,
and one is a boy. My oldest gal, she lives in Atlanta." She ignored the
question as to where her other daughter lives. "My son wuks at de
Georgian Hotel. But understand now, dem ain't George Huff's chillun.
Deir pappy was my sweetheart what got into trouble and runned away. I
ain't gwine to tell his name.

"Honey, I jus' tell you de truth; de reason why I jined de church was
'cause I was a wild gal, and dere warn't nothin' too mean for me to do
for a long time. Mammy and my sisters kept on beggin' me to change my
way of livin', but I didn't 'til four years ago. I got sick and thought
I was goin' to die, and den I begged de good Lord to forgive me and
promised Him if He would let me git well 'nough to git out of dat bed, I
would change and do good de rest of my life. When I was able to git up,
I jined de church. I didn't mean to burn in hell lak de preachers said I
would. I thinks evvybody ought to jine de church and live right.

"Oh-h-h! Lady, I sho' do thank you for dis here dime. I'm gwine to buy
me some meat wid it. I ain't had none dis week. My white folks is mighty
good to me, but Niggers don't pay me no mind.

"Has you axed me all you wants to? I sho' is glad 'cause I ain't had
nothin' t'eat yit." She pulled down her stocking to tie the coin in its
top and revealed an expanse of sores from ankle to knee. A string was
tied above each knee. "A white lady told me dem strings soaked in
kerosene would drive out de misery from my laigs," Alice explained.
"Goodbye Honey, and God bless you."
