



"I was born in Anne Arundel County near Davidsonville about 3 miles from
South River in the year 1844. The daughter of a free man and a slave
woman, who was owned by Thomas Davidson, a slave owner and farmer of
Anne Arundel. He had a large farm and about 25 slaves on his farm all of
whom lived in small huts with the exception of several of the household
help who ate and slept in the manor house. My mother being one of the
household slaves, enjoyed certain privileges that the farm slaves did
not. She was the head cook of Mr. Davidson's household.

"Mr. Davidson and his family were considered people of high social
standing in Annapolis and the people in the county. Mr. Davidson
entertained on a large scale, especially many of the officers of the
Naval Academy at Annapolis and his friends from Baltimore. Mrs.
Davidson's dishes were considered the finest, and to receive an
invitation from the Davidsons meant that you would enjoy Maryland's
finest terrapin and chicken besides the best wine and champagne on the
market.

"All of the cooking was supervised by mother, and the table was waited
on by Uncle Billie, dressed in a uniform, decorated with brass buttons,
braid and a fancy Test, his hands incased in white gloves. I can see him
now, standing at the door, after he had rung the bell. When the family
and guests came in he took his position behind Mr. Davidson ready to
serve or to pass the plates, after they had been decorated with meats,
fowl or whatever was to be eaten by the family or guest.

"Mr. Davidson was very good to his slaves, treating them with every
consideration that he could, with the exception of freeing them; but
Mrs. Davidson was hard on all the slaves, whenever she had the
opportunity, driving them at full speed when working, giving different
food of a coarser grade and not much of it. She was the daughter of one
of the Revells of the county, a family whose reputation was known all
over Maryland for their brutality with their slaves.

"Mother with the consent of Mr. Davidson, married George Berry, a free
colored man of Annapolis with the proviso that he was to purchase mother
within three years after marriage for $750 dollars and if any children
were born they were to go with her. My father was a carpenter by trade,
his services were much in demand. This gave him an opportunity to save
money. Father often told me that he could save more than half of his
income. He had plenty of work, doing repair and building, both for the
white people and free colored people. Father paid Mr. Davidson for
mother on the partial payment plan. He had paid up all but $40 on
mother's account, when by accident Mr. Davidson was shot while ducking
on the South River by one of the duck hunters, dying instantly.

"Mrs. Davidson assumed full control of the farm and the slaves. When
father wanted to pay off the balance due, $40.00, Mrs. Davidson refused
to accept it, thus mother and I were to remain in slavery. Being a free
man father had the privilege to go where he wanted to, provided he was
endorsed by a white man who was known to the people and sheriffs,
constables and officials of public conveyances. By bribery of the
sheriff of Anne Arundel County father was given a passage to Baltimore
for mother and me. On arriving in Baltimore, mother, father and I went
to a white family on Ross Street--now Druid Hill Ave., where we were
sheltered by the occupants, who were ardent supporters of the
Underground Railroad.

"A reward of $50.00 each was offered for my father, mother and me, one
by Mrs. Davidson and the other by the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County. At
this time the Hookstown Road was one of the main turnpikes into
Baltimore. A Mr. Coleman whose brother-in-law lived in Pennsylvania,
used a large covered wagon to transport merchandise from Baltimore to
different villages along the turnpike to Hanover, Pa., where he lived.
Mother and father and I were concealed in a large wagon drawn, by six
horses. On our way to Pennsylvania, we never alighted on the ground in
any community or close to any settlement, fearful of being apprehended
by people who were always looking for rewards.

"After arriving at Hanover, Pennsylvania, it was easy for us to get
transportation farther north. They made their way to Scranton,
Pennsylvania, in which place they both secured positions in the same
family. Father and mother's salary combined was $27.50 per month. They
stayed there until 1869. In the meantime I was being taught at a Quaker
mission in Scranton. When we come to Baltimore I entered the 7th grade
grammar school in South Baltimore. After finishing the grammar school, I
followed cooking all my life before and after marriage. My husband James
Berry, who waited at the Howard House, died in 1927--aged 84. On my next
birthday, which will occur on the 22nd of November, I will be 95. I can
see well, have an excellent appetite, but my grandchildren will let me
eat only certain things that they say the doctor ordered I should eat.
On Christmas Day 49 children and grandchildren and some
great-grandchildren gave me a Xmas dinner and one hundred dollars for
Xmas. I am happy with all the comforts of a poor person not dependant on
any one else for tomorrow".
