


"Now what you want with me? I was born in Mississippi. I come here
tollable young. I'se ninety-three now.

"My old master mean to us. We used to watch for him to come in the big
gate, then we run and hide. He used to come to the quarters and make us
chillun sing. He make us sing Dixie. Sometimes he make us sing half a
day. Seems like Dixie his main song. I tell you I don't like it _now_. But
have mercy! He make us sing it. Seems like all the white folks like
Dixie. I'se glad when he went away to war.

"But they used to feed you. Heap better meat than you get now. I tell
you they _had_ things to eat in them days.

"I 'member when the soldiers was comin' through and runnin' the white
folks both ways. Law chile--you don't know nothin'! We used to hide in
the cistern. One time when the Yankees come in a rush my brother and me
hide in the feather bed.

"When the war ended, white man come to the field and tell my
mother-in-law she free as he is. She dropped her hoe and danced up to
the turn road and danced right up into old master's parlor. She went so
fast a bird could a sot on her dress tail. That was in June. That night
she sent and got all the neighbors and they danced all night long.

"I never went to school a day in my life. I wish I could read but they
ain't no use wishin' for spilt milk.

"How long I been in Arkansas? Let me see how many chillun I had since I
been to Arkansas. Let me see--I fotch four chillun with me and I'se the
mother of ten.

"Yes'm I sho' has worked hard. I worked in the field and cooked and
washed and ironed. But oh Lord I likes my freedom.

"I couldn't tell you what I think of this present generation. They is
just like a hoss on the battle field--white and black. They say
'Grandma, you just an old fogy.'

"I think they is another slave-time gal down in the next block. You want
me to show you?"

"In slavery times you used to carry a rabbit foot in your pocket to keep
old massa from whippin' you."

 



"We used to play a game called 'Once Over.' Throw a ball over the house
and if they caught it on the other side, they'd run around and try to
catch you.

"Then we used to play 'Hide the Switch.' And if you found it, the others
all run to keep from bein' hit. Oh Lawd, that's been a long time."

 