



"I was born in Chetam County close to Nashville, Tennessee. Our master
was named Joe Harris. His wife was Miss Sallie Harris. They had eight
children. I knowed Newt, Tom and Kittie. My mother had nine children.
Her name was Julia. My papa's name was Isom Harris. I think they belong
to the same family of white folks. Granny was old woman looked after
white children. See if any of em got sick. She seen after little nigger
children too. Mama was a field hand like papa. After war Plummer Harris
went on off. He was cruel to his wife and grown folks but good to the
children. We had good houses and plenty wood but the feed was light.

"I seen the Yankees riding through the country. They looked pretty,
'specially them on white horses. My papa and mama left. Mama died with
pneumonia. Papa died, too. We had a mighty hard time after freedom and
before too. Papa worked about on shares--hired out on jobs.

"When freedom come on we went on and they didn't think to give us
nothing. When the hands all left they had the land and nobody to work.
They was land pore. It was tore up. Fences down, houses down, and
nothing to be raised to eat in the winter.

"When I got bigger I helped build the North Western Railroad into
Nashville. I made right smart of money. I was building up the track
bed. I farmed, worked on the section. I delivered here till my feet got
in bad fix.

"I got thirteen children in all. Some in Tennessee by my first wife and
some here and some grandchildren.

"Folks won't work like I used to work. It ain't no use to be 'larmed
bout the times--they been changing since the world started--still
changing. If you able it is best to go hunt work and be at a job
working.

"I heard about the Ku Klux, they never troubled us. I seen em. I was
scared of em.

"I get commodities and a check for us three old folks. My wife washes
and irons.

"I got a bunion on one foot and raw sores on top of my toes. It won't
cure up. Both feet in bad shape. My wife had both her legs broke. We
doing very well."
