NE
MRS. ROSA MILLEGAN, 231 Chestnut Ave. NE
MR. JASPER MILLEGAN, 231 Chestnut Ave. NE
Atlanta, Ga.


Mrs. Emmaline Heard, who resides at 239 Cain St. NE has proved to be a
regular storehouse for conjure and ghost stories. Not only this but she
is a firm believer in the practice of conjure. To back up her belief in
conjure is her appearance. She is a dark brown-skinned woman of medium
height and always wears a dirty towel on her head. The towel which was
at one time white gives her the weird look of an old-time fortune
teller.

Tuesday, December 8, 1936 a visit was made to her home and the following
information was secured:

"There wuz onct a house in McDonough and it wuz owned by the Smiths that
wuz slave owners way back yonder. Now, this is the trufe cause it wuz
told ter me by old Uncle Joe Turner and he 'spirience it. Nobody could
live in this house I don't care how they tried. Dey say this house wuz
hanted and anybody that tried to stay there wuz pulled out of bed by a
hant. Well, sir, they offered the house and $1,000 to anyone who could
stay there over night. Uncle Joe said he decided to try it so sho nuff
he got ready one night and went ter this house to stay. After while,
says he, something come in the room and started over ter the bed, but
fore it got there, he said, "What in the name of the Lord you want with
me." It said, 'follow me. There is a pot of gold buried near the
chimney; go find it and you won't be worried with me no more.' Der next
morning Uncle Joe went out there and begin ter dig and sho nuff he found
the gold; and sides that he got the house. Dis here is the trufe. Uncle
Joe's house is right there in McDonough now and anybody round there will
tell you the same thing cause he wuz well-known. Uncle Joe is dead now.

"Anudder story that happened during slavery time and wuz told ter me by
father wuz this; The master had a old man on his plantation named
Jimson. Well, Jimson's wife wuz sick and had been fer nearly a year. One
day there she wanted some peas, black eyed peas; but old man Harper
didn't have none on his plantation, so Jimson planned ter steal off that
night and go ter old Marse Daniel's farm, which wuz 4 miles from Marse
Harper's farm, and steal a few peas for his wife. Well, between midnight
and day he got a sack and started off down the road. Long after while a
owl started hootin, sho-o-o are-e-e, who-o-o-o-, and it wounded jest lak
someone saying 'who are you.' Jimson got scared, pulled off his cap and
run all the way to old man Daniel's farm. As he run he wuz saying, "Sir,
dis is me, old Jimson" over and over again. Now, when he got near the
farm Old Daniel heard him and got up in the loft ter watch him. Finally
old Jimson got dar and started creeping up in the loft. When he got up
dar, chile, Marse Daniel grabbed his whip and 'most beat Jimson ter
death.

"This here story happened in Mississippi years ago, but den folks that
tell it ter me said it wuz the trufe. 'There wuz a woman that wuz sick;
her name wuz Mary Jones. Well, she lingered and lingered till she
finally died. In them days folks all around would come ter the settin-up
if somebody wuz dead. They done sent some men after the casket. Since
they had ter go 30 miles they wuz a good while getting back, so the
folkses decided ter sing. After while they heard the men come up on the
porch and somebody got up ter let 'em in. Chile, jest as they opened the
door that 'oman set straight up on that bed; and sech another runnin and
getting out of that house you never heard; but some folks realized she
wuzn't dead so they got the casket out der way so she wouldn't see it,
cause they wuz fraid she would pass out sho nuff; jest the same they wuz
fraid of her, too. The man went off and come back with postols, guns,
sticks, and everything; and when this 'oman saw 'em she said, 'don't
run, I won't bother you.' but, chile, they left there in a big hurry,
too. Well, this here Mary went to her sister's house and knocked on the
door, and said: 'Let me in. This is Mary. I want to talk to you and tell
you where I've been.' The sister's husband opened the door and let her
in. This 'oman told 'em that God had brought her to and that she had
been in a trance with the Lord. After that every one wuz always afraid
of that 'oman and they wouldn't even sit next ter her in the church.
They say she is still living.

"This happened right yonder in McDonough years ago. A gal went to a party
with her sweet'art and her ma told her not ter go. Well, she went on
anyhow in a buggy; when they got ter the railroad crossing a train hit
the buggy and killed the gal, but the boy didn't git hurted at all.
Well, while they wuz sittin up with this dead gal, the boy comes long
there in his buggy with anudder gal, and do you know that horse stopped
right in front uv that house and wouldn't budge one inch. No matter how
hard he whip that horse it wouldn't move; instid he rared and kicked and
jumped about and almost turned the buggy over. The gal in the buggy
fainted. Finally a old slavery time man come along and told him to git a
quart of whiskey and pour it around the buggy and the hant would go
away. So they done that and the sperit let 'em pass. If a hant laked
whisky in they lifetime, and you pour it round where they's at, they
will go away."

The following are true conjure stories supposedly witnessed by Mrs.
Heard: "There wuz a Rev. Dennis that lived below the Federal Prison.
Now, he wuz the preacher of the Hardshell Baptist Church in this
community. This man stayed sick about a year and kept gittin different
doctors and none uv them did him any good. Well, his wife kept on at him
till he decided ter go ter see Dr. Geech. His complaint wuz that he felt
something run up his legs ter his thighs. Old Dr. Geech told him that he
had snakes in his body and they wuz put there by the lady he had been
going wid. Dr. Geech give him some medicine ter take and told him that
on the 7th day from then that 'oman would come and take the medicine off
the shelf and throw it away. Course Rev. Dennis didn't believe a thing
he said, so sho nuff she come jest lak Dr. Geech said and took the
medicine away. Dr. Geech told him that he would die when the snakes got
up in his arm, but if he would do lak he told him he would get all
right. Dis 'oman had put this stuff in some whiskey and he drunk it so
the snakes breed in his body. After he quit taking the medicine he got
bad off and had ter stay in the bed; sho nuff the morning he died you
could see the snake in his arm; the print uv it wuz there when he died.
The snake stretched out in his arm and died, too.

"I got a son named Jack Heard. Well, somebody fixed him. I wuz in
Chicago when that happened and my daughter kept writing ter me ter come
home cause Jack wuz acting funny and she thought maybe he wuz losing his
mind. They wuz living in Thomasville then and every day he would go sit
round the store and laugh and talk, but jest as soon as night would come
and he would eat his supper them fits would come on him. He would squeal
jest lak a pig and he would get down on his knees and bark jest lak a
dog. Well, I come home and went ter see a old conjure doctor. He says
ter me, 'that boy is hurt and when you go home you look in the corner of
the mattress and you will find it. 'Sho nuff I went home and looked in
the corner of the mattress and there the package wuz. It wuz a mixture
of his hair and bluestone wrapped up in red flannel with new needles
running all through it. When I went back he says ter me, 'Emmaline, have
you got 8 dimes?' No, I said, but I got a dollar. 'Well, get that dollar
changed into 10 dimes and take 8 of 'em and give 'em ter me. Then he
took Jack in a room, took off his clothes and started ter rubbin him
down with medicine; all at the same time he wuz saying a ceremony over
him; then he took them 8 dimes, put 'em in a bag and tied them around
Jack's chest somewhere so that they would hang over his heart. 'Now,
wear them always,' says he ter Jack. Jack wore them dimes a long time
but he finally drunk 'em up anyway, that doctor cured him cause he sho
would a died."

The following aroma [HW: is a] few facts as related by Mrs. Heard
concerning an old conjure doctor known as Aunt Barkas [TR: Darkas
throughout rest of story].


"Aunt Darkas lived in McDonough, Ga. until a few years ago. She died
when she wuz 128 years old; but, chile, lemme tell you that 'oman knowed
just what ter do fer you. She wuz blind but she could go ter the woods
and pick out any kind of root or herb she wanted. She always said the
Lord told her what roots to get and always fore sun-up you would see her
in the woods with a short handled pick. She said she had ter pick 'em
for sun-up; I don't know why. If you wuz sick all you had ter do wuz go
ter see Aunt Darkas and tell her. She had a well and after listening to
your complaint she would go out there and draw a bucket of water and set
it on the floor, and then she would wave her hand over it and say
something. She called this healing the water. After this she would give
you a drink of water. As she hand it ter you, she would say, 'now drink,
take this and drink.' Honey, I had some of that water myself and blieve
me it goes all over you and makes you feel so good. Old Aunt Darkas
would give you a supply of water and tell you ter come back fer more
when that wuz gone. Old Aunt Darkas said the Lord gave her power and
vision, and she used to fast for a week at a time. When she died there
wuz a piece in the paper bout her.

"This here is sho the trufe, and if you don't believe it, go out ter
Southview Cemetery and see Sid Heard, my oldest son; he been out there
over 20 years as sexton and bookkeeper. Yessir, he tole it ter me and I
believe it. This happen long ago, 10 or 15 years. There wuz a couple
that lived in Macon, Ga., but their home wuz in Atlanta and they had a
lot out ter Southview. Well, they had a young baby that tuck sick and
died so they had the baby's funeral there in Macon; then they put the
coffin in the box, placed the label on the box, then brought it ter
Atlanta. Folkes are always buried so that they head faces the east. They
say when Judgment Day come and Gabriel blow that trumpet everybody will
rise up facing the east. Well, as I wuz saying, they came here. Sid
Heard met 'em out yonder and instructed his men fer arrangements fer the
grave and everything. A few weeks later the 'oman called Sid Heard up
long distance. She said, 'Mr. Heard.' Yesmam, he said. 'I call you ter
tell you me and my husband can't rest at all.' 'Why?' he asked. 'Because
we can hear our baby crying every night and it is worrying us ter death.
Our neighbors next door say our baby must be buried wrong.' Sid Heard
said, Well, I buried the baby according ter the way you got the box
labeled. 'I am not blaming you, Mr. Heard, but if I pay you will you
take my baby up?' Yesmam, I will if you want me to; jest let me know the
day you will be here and I'll have everything ready. Alright, said she.

'Well,' said Sid Heard, 'the day she wuz ter come she wuz sick and
instead sent a car load of her friends. The men got busy and started
digging till they got ter the box; when they took it up sho nuff after
they opened it, they found the baby had been buried wrong; the head was
facing the west instead of the east. They turned the box around and
covered it up. The folks then went on back to Macon. A week later the
'omen called up again. 'Mr. Heard,' she says. Yesmam, says he. 'Well, I
haven't heard my baby cry at all in the past week. I wuzn't there but I
know the exact date you took my baby up, cause I never heard it cry no
more.'


[MRS. ROSA MILLEGAN AND MR. JASPER MILLEGAN]

On December 10, 1936 Mr. and Mrs. Millegan who reside at 231 Chestnut
Ave. NE. were interviewed on the subject of superstitions, signs,
conjure, etc. Mrs. Rosa Millegan studied awhile after the facts of the
interview were made clear to her. Finally she said; "I kin tell you more
bout conjure; that's all I know bout cause I done been hurted myself and
every word of it is the trufe.

"Well, it happen lak this. I wuz suffering with rheumatism in my arm and
a old man in the neighborhood came ter me and gave me some medicine that
he said would help me. Well, I done suffered so I thought mebbe it might
help me a little. Chile honey, 'after I done tuck some of that stuff I
nearly went crazy. I couldn't talk; couldn't hardly move and my head
look lak it bust open. I didn't know what ter do. I called medical
doctors and they jest didn't do me no good. Let me tell you right here,
when you done been conjured, medical doctors can't do you no good; you
got ter get a nudder conjur doctor ter get it off you. Well, one day I
says to my daughter, "I'm through wid medical doctors. I'm gwine ter Sam
Durham. They say he is good and I go find out. Chile, folks done give me
up ter die. I use ter lay in bed and hear 'em say, she won't never get
up. Well, I went ter Sam Durham and he looked at me and said: 'You is
hurt in the mouth.' He carried me in a small room, put some medicine
around my face, and told me ter sit down a while. After while my mouth
and face begin ter feel lak it wuz paralyzed, and he begin ter talk.
'That man that give you that medicine is mad wid you about his wife and
he fixed you. Now do what I tell you and you will overcome it. He is
coming ter your door and is gwine want ter shake your hand. Don't let
him touch you, but speak ter him in the name of the Lord and throw your
hands over your head; by doing this you will overcome him and the
devil.' Anudder thing he says; 'This man is coming from around the back
of your house.' Then he give me 5 vials of different lengths and a half
cup of pills, and told me ter take all that medicine. He told me too ter
get a rooster and let him stay on my porch all the time and he couldn't
get ter me no more. Sho nuff, that nigger come jest lak he said he wuz
going ter do, but I fixed him. Later on this same man tried ter fix his
wife cause he thought she had anudder man. Do you know that oman
couldn't drink water in her house? and when he died he wuz nearly crazy;
they had ter strap him in the bed; all the while he wuz cussin God and
raving."

The next stories were told to the writer by Mr. Jasper Millegan:

"My uncle wuz poisoned. Yes, sir, somebody fixed him in coffee. He
lingered and lingered and finally got so he wuz confined ter bed fer
good. Somebody put scorpions in him and whenever they would crawl under
his skin he would nearly go crazy, and it looked lak his eyes would jest
pop out. He waited so long ter go ter the conjure doctors they couldn't
do him any good. And the medical doctors ain't no good fer nothing lak
that. Yes, sir, them snakes would start in his feet and run up his leg.
He nebber did get any better and he died.

"A long time ago I saw a lady that wuz conjured in her feet; somebody
put something down fer her ter walk over. Well, anyway she got down with
her feet and couldn't travel from her bed ter a chair. Well, she got a
old conjure doctor ter come treat her and he rubbed her feet with
medicine and after he done that a while he told her that something wuz
coming out of her feet. Sho nuff, I see'd them maggots with my own eyes
when they come out of her feet; but she got well."

The following are preventatives to use against conjure; also a few home
treatments for different sickness.

"Ter keep from being conjured, always use plenty salt and pepper. Always
get up soon in the morning so nobody can see you and sprinkle salt and
pepper around your door and they sho can't git at you.

"If you think you done been poisoned or conjured, take a bitter gourd
and remove the seeds, then beat 'em up and make a tea. You sho will
heave all of it up.

"Ef you think you will have a stroke, go to running water and get four
flint rocks; heat 'em and lay on all of them, and believe me, it will
start your blood circulating and prevent the stroke. Another way to
start your blood circulating; heat a brick and (lay) lie on it.

"To get rid of corns, bathe your feet in salt water and take a little
salt and put it 'tween your toes."

Mrs. Millegan closed her interview by telling the writer that every
morning found her sprinkling her salt and pepper, cause she knows what
it means ter be fixed. As the writer started out the door she noticed a
horse shoe hanging over the door.
