PHOEBE HENDERSON, a 105 year old Negro of Harrison Co., was born a
     slave of the Bradley family at Macon, Georgia. After the death of
     her mistress, Phoebe belonged to one of the daughters, Mrs. Wiley
     Hill, who moved to Panola County, Texas in 1859, where Phoebe lived
     until after the Civil War. For the past 22 years she has lived with
     Mary Ann Butler, a daughter, about five miles east of Marshall, in
     Enterprise Friendship Community. She draws a pension of $16.00 a
     month.


"I was bo'n a slave of the Bradley family in Macon, Georgia. My father's
name was Anthony Hubbard and he belonged to the Hubbard's in Georgia. He
was a young man when I lef' Georgia and I never heard from him since. I
'member my mother; she had a gang of boys. Marster Hill brought her to
Texas with us.

"My ole missus name was Bradley and she died in Tennessee. My lil'
missus was her daughter. After dey brought us to Texas in 1859 I worked
in the field many a day, plowin' and hoein', but the children didn't do
much work 'cept carry water. When dey git tired, dey'd say dey was sick
and the overseer let 'em lie down in de shade. He was a good and kindly
man and when we do wrong and go tell him he forgave us and he didn't
whip the boys 'cause he was afraid they'd run away.

"I worked in de house, too. I spinned seven curts a day and every night
we run two looms, makin' large curts for plow lines. We made all our
clothes. We didn't wear shoes in Georgia but in this place the land was
rough and strong, so we couldn't go barefooted. A black man that worked
in the shop measured our feet and made us two pairs a year. We had good
houses and dey was purty good to us. Sometimes missus give us money and
each family had their garden and some chickens. When a couple marry, the
master give them a house and we had a good time and plenty to wear and
to eat. They cared for us when we was sick.

"Master Wiley Hill had a big plantation and plenty of stock and hawgs,
and a big turnip patch. He had yellow and red oxen. We never went to
school any, except Sunday school. We'd go fishin' often down on the
creek and on Saturday night we'd have parties in the woods and play ring
plays and dance.

"My husband's name was David Henderson and we lived on the same place
and belonged to the same man. No, suh, Master Hill didn't have nothin'
to do with bringin' us together. I guess God done it. We fell in love,
and David asked Master Hill for me. We had a weddin' in the house and
was married by a colored Baptist preacher. I wore a white cotton dress
and Missus Hill give me a pan of flour for a weddin' present. He give us
a house of our own. My husband was good to me. He was a careful man and
not rowdy. When we'd go anywhere we'd ride horseback and I'd ride behin'
him.

"I's scared to talk 'bout when I was freed. I 'member the soldiers and
that warrin' and fightin'. Toby, one of the colored boys, joined the
North and was a mail messenger boy and he had his horse shot out from
under him. But I guess its a good thing we was freed, after all.
