*I*

_DEY KEP’ NIGGERS IN GOOD CONDITION TO SELL_

Standing in the middle of the road at Prichard, suburb of Mobile, and
gesticulating while talking to a small group of interested listeners an
old Negro man ended his talk to the small gathering and punctuated his
last sentence with a spat of tobacco.

"No’m," he continued after I had put in my appearance and asked him a
question, "I doesn’t know whether I was a slave, but jus’ de same I seed
Gen’l Grant’s army when it went th’ough Virginny. Jus’ as sho’ as you is
standin’ dar, lady, I seed dem mens all dressed in blue suits,
a-marching’ side by side, gwine down de road pas’ our place. It tuk ’em
three days to go by our house.

"An’ I remembers when dem Yankees came to our ole Mistis’ house an’ take
a ladder an’ clumb up to de roof an’ tear de boards outter de ceilin’ to
git dem big hams an’ shoulders my white folks done had hid up dar. When
de Yankees find dat stuff dey give it all to de niggers. Den atter de
solgers lef’ ole Miss called us to her an’ tol’ us we was free, but for
us to give back some of de meat an’ things dat de Yankees done give us,
'ca’se she didn’t have nothin’ to eat ’roun’ de place. ’Course we was
glad to do it, ’ca’se Mistis sho’ was good to us.

"I remembers ebery Sunday mawnin’ dat she’d make de older slaves bring
all de little niggers up to de big house, so she could read de Bible to
'em, and den she give us plenty of dem good biscuits and taters dat
Susanne cook for us. She’d say: ’Git ’roun’ dere, Susanne, and he’p dem
little niggers’ plates.’ I really thought Mistis was a angel.

"Talkin’ ’bout niggers bein’ free. Ole Miss tol’ us was free, but it was
ten or twelve years atter de surrender befo’ I knowed whut she meant. I
was a big boy goin’ to school befo’ I had an understandin’ as to what
she meant.

"Ole Miss taught de niggers how to read an’ write an’ some of ’em got to
be too good at it, ’ca’se dey learned how to write too many passes so’s
de pattyrollers wouldn’t cotch ’em, an’ on dem occasions was de onlyes’
times dat I ever seed one of our niggers punished.

"Mistis never ’lowed no mistreatin’ of de slaves, ’case dey was raisin’
slaves for de market, an’ it wouldn’t be good bizness to mistreat ’em.
Lor’ Miss, my white folks was rich; dey had as many as five or six
hundred niggers; men, women an’ chilluns. De plantation was big, but I
doesn’t remember how many acres it was, but I does remember dat de
cabins was all built in rows, an’ dere was streets laid out among de
cabins. De chimneys was built outten dirt an’ sticks, an’ you know up in
Virginny it got powerful cold, so when dey built de cabins dey th’owed
dirt up under ’em to keep de wind an’ snow out.

"I was bawn in Henry County, Virginny, near Danville, an’ I’s been to
Vicksburg an’ Petersburg a many a time wid my pappy to de wheat an’
'bacca market. Lor’, honey, Virginny is de bes’ place on earth for good
eaten’ an’ good white folks. If anybody tells you dat de white folks was
mean to dere niggers, dey neber come from Virginny, ’case us was too
near de free states, an’ I done already tol’ you dat dey raised niggers
to sell an’ dey kep’ ’em in good condition. In dose days white folks an’
black folks was black folks. Jus’ lak Booker T. Washington was a riber
between de niggers of dis generation an’ learnin’. He had all dat was
fine an’ good, an’ he give de bes’ to his people iffen dey would take
it. Dat was de way wid de white folks den; dey didn’t do no whuppin’.

"I’s de onlyes’ rat lef’ in de pond, an’ ’case I ain’t hung in de smoke
house, folks thinks I’s not as old as I say I is, but chile, I’s been
here a long time. I ’members how black Sam useta preach to us, an’ when
I growed up I useta think warnt nobody Christians cep’n us Babtists, but
I know better now, an’ de longer I lives de mo’ I realizes dat de
churches go ’way ’case dey leaves off de ordinances of God, although us
has a Bible an’ mo’ Christian readin’ dan ever befo’.

"My mammy’s name was Eliza Rowlets an’ my pappy’s was Joseph Holmes. My
pappy had de same name as de peoples dat owned him an’ my gran’mammy
name was Lucy Holmes. Gran’mammy Holmes lived to be over a hundred years
old, an’ she was de fust pusson I ever seed daid. In dem days it tuk
three days to bury a pusson, ’case dey dug de graves as deep as de
corpse was tall.

"Land sakes a-livin’, us had great times, an’ I forgot to tell you dat
us had home-made beds wid two sides nailed to de wall an’ de mattresses
was made outen wheat straw.

"As for huntin’ I done plenty of it an’ one thing I got to git
forgiveness for was when I lef’ Virginny, I lef’ ’bout fifty or sixty
snares set to cotch rabbits an’ birds.

"My mammy had eight chilluns an’ we was raised in pairs. I had a sister
who come along wid me, an’ iffen I jumped in de river she done it too.
An’ iffen I go th’ough a briar patch, here she come along too.

"’Bout de fruit; it makes my mouth water to think about dem cheese
apples, dat was yaller lak gold, an’ dose Abraham apples, an’ de cherry
tree as big as dese oaks here. I’s eaten many a big sugar and sweetheart
cherry. But dere was another kind called de Gorilla dat growed as big as
de yaller plums down dis way. Now let me tell you somp’n ’bout Virginny;
'dey had dere laws ’bout drink. Dey had de bes’ peach an’ cherry brandy
an’ mos’ any kin’ you eber heared of, but dey didn’t ’low you to make
drink outten anything you could make bread wid; sich as corn or rye. Us
had our brandy same as you would coffee, ’case it was cold, an’ some
mawnin’s my pappy would git de brandy out an’ my mammy would putt a
little water an’ sugar wid it an’ gib it to us chilluns. Us neber
thought nothin’ ’bout drinkin’. I kinda believes lak dat ole infidel
Ingersoll who said dat anything dat was a custom was dere religion.

"Now you axed about hog-killin’ time? Dat was de time of times. For
weeks de mens would haul wood an’ big rocks, an’ pile ’em together as
high as dis house, an’ den have several piles lak dat ’roun’ a big hole
in de groun’ what had been filled wid water. Den jus’ a little atter
midnight, de boss would blow de ole hawn, an’ all de mens would git up
an’ git in dem pig pens. Den dey would sot dat pile of wood on fire an’
den start knockin’ dem hogs in de haid. Us neber shot a hog lak us does
now; us always used an axe to kill ’em wid. Atter knockin’ de hog in de
haid, dey would tie a rope on his leg an’ atter de water got to de right
heat, fum dose red-hot rocks de hog would be throwed in an’ drug aroun’
a while, den taken out an’ cleaned. Atter he was cleaned he was cut up
into sections an’ hung up in de smoke house. Lawsie, lady, dey don’t
cure meat dese days; dey jus’ uses some kind of liquid to brush over it.
We useta have sho’ ’nuff meat.

"Den come cawnshuckin’ time. My goodness, I would jus’ love to be dar
now. De cawn would be piled up high an’ one man would git on dat pile.
It was usually a kinda nigger foreman who could sing an’ git de work
outten de niggers. Dis fo’man would sing a verse somp’n lak dis:

    Polk and Clay went to war,
    Polk come back wid a broken jaw.

Den all de niggers would sing back at him wid a kinda shoutin’ sound.
Near ’bout all de times de fo’man made up his own songs, by pickin’ dem
outen dat shuckin’! It war de jug dat dey brung aroun’ eve’y hour. Dat’s
de onlyes’ time de slaves really got drunk.

"In dem ole days I went to plenty of dances an’ candy pullin’s durin’ de
Yule season, but I doesn’t do dat no mo’. I’s a preacher an’ when I fus’
lef’ Virginny, I come to Georgy an’ stayed dar twenty years whar I
kicked up plenty of dus’. I even taught school dar. Den I come to
Alabamy an’ lived in Evergreen for ’bout twenty mo’ years. Since I been
in Mobile I’s worked for sich men as ole Simon, Damrich, an’ Van
Antwerp, an’ all dere chilluns has been in dese here arms of mine. I’s
been a square citizen an’ dere hasn’t been a time dat I is had to call
on nobody but Uncle Sam when ole man ’pression cotched me. But thank de
Lawd I is still able to git about an’ have all my senses ’cep’ my
eye-sight, an’ it’s jus’ a little po’ly. I is got all my teeths ’cep’
one, an’ my mammy was always proud of my hair. See how silky an’ fine it
is? Not quite white, dough. I hope I lives long enough for it to turn
white as snow. I think St. Peter will lak it better dat way."

    