_CHASING GUINEA JIM, THE RUNAWAY SLAVE_

Seven miles East from Livingston on State Road No. 80, thence Left two
miles via a dim road through the woods to a cultivated section, the
beginning of a large plantation area, stands the old-timey cabin of Josh
Horn, a well known and influential figure in the colored community.
Vigorous and active despite his more than 80 years, Josh exemplifies the
gentleness with which time deals with those dwelling in a healthful spot
and living the simple lives of a rural people. I found him nodding on
his front steps.

"Josh," I said, "I’ve come to get you to tell me some old war-time
stories, and I want to ask you some questions about you and Alice and
how you-all are getting along. I just want to know all about you and
your family as far back as you can remember."

"All right, Miss Ruby, I’s glad to tell you what I knows," said Josh,
"and it ain’t gonna be a lot of fibbin’, but jes’ lak everything was.
I’s telling you lak you axed me.

"Now, ’bout how us is getting along. I’s telling you de troof, ef I was
took ’fore God, I’d say jes’ lak I’s saying now, ef my chillun ever et a
moufful dat wasn’t honest, dey et it somewhar else, ’ca’se I ain’t ever
stole a moufful somepin’ t’eat for ’em in all my life. It’s honest
vittles dey et, and varmints I’s killed in de woods, ’ca’se us raised
chillun fast, and us had a heap of ’em, sixteen, if I ’members right,
and soon’s I found out dat I could help feed ’em dat way, I done a heap
of hunting. And everybody knows I’s a good hunter. Alice used to make me
go every Friday night; den us always had a ’possum or two for Sunday."

"Why," I asked, "didn’t you go Saturday night?"

"Well, I’ll tell you," Josh said, "Alice is a good Christian woman, and
she knowed I’d hunt mighty nigh all night, and she didn’t want nobody
see me coming in Sunday morning wid no gun and no dogs; so I went every
Friday night and went in de week too, and dat holp a lot to feed de
chillun. I don’t owe nobody, not a nickel.

"I lak to got in debt, when de Government come in and tried to help us
wid dat cotton doings. Dey cut it down so on me, tell I couldn’t make
nothing; but I’s getting on all right now, and so is my chillun. Us is
got fourteen living, and dey’s all been to school, but ain’t but one
been to Booker Washington’s school, but dey kin all read and write, and
some of ’em teaching school out here in de country. De doctor, he come
clear out here to see us, ’ca’se I always pays him. He jes’ here wid
Alice last night. It’s nine mile and two of dem’s back here in de woods
through Marse Johnnie’s place, but he come when us went atter him ’bout
midnight, and dat’s a comfort to know he come."

I asked, what was the matter with Alice.

"Well, I’ll tell you, Miss Ruby. She was back dere wid me in de kitchen,
and I got through eating and I come out and set down in de swinger to
git some air. De moon was shining, and Alice come out, saying loud as
she could: ’Who is you? Who is you?’ De chillun run to her wid a lamp
and I run, and ’twan’t nobody dere. Well, Alice said 'twas a big man
standing right ’side her dressed in black, and she called it Death. Us
couldn’t do nothing wid her, and she didn’t know nobody, me nor de
chillun, so I went to Livingston atter Dr. McCain, and he come and set
wid her ’bout a hour. He said ’twas de ’cute 'digestion or somepin’ lak
dat. I knowed ’twan’t no sperrit; I don’t b’lieve in nothing lak dat."

"Well," I said, "I don’t know, Josh, I’ve been hearing some ghost tales
that freeze the blood in my veins."

"Yassum," said Josh, "if you wants to hear ghost tales, I kin sho tell
'em, ca’se I seed dis here wid my own eyes. ’Tain’t no made-up nothing,
needer; jes’ somepin’ I seed jes’ lak I tells you.

"Green Hale and Isham Mathews b’longed to New Hope church, and de
Reverend Bird Hall pastored dere. Dey axed me down to hear him preach
one night, and us three, me and Green and Isham, was riding along side
and side. I’s riding a mule, but it was a fast mule, and Green couldn’t
keep up, en Isham said: ’Somebody been hunting.’ I looked up and ’twas a
sapling right ’cross de road. He said, ’Fellow oughten leave nothing lak
dat. When de moon git low, it hit him in de face.’ De moon was straight
up and down den, and I said: ’Dat’s right’, and I’s telling you de
troof, dat sapling jes’ riz up, turned aroun’ in de air, en de brush
part tickled my mule and Isham’s hoss in de face. If you ever seed ’em
buck and rare and jump up, dey sho did. Den dey took off down de road,
and we didn’t hold ’em back, and here come Green. We lef’ him behind,
'cause his mule couldn’t keep up. If you ever heard a man pray more
earnester dan old Green, I ain’t! He come down de road a-yelling: ’Lord,
us live togedder, let us die togedder.’ He meant for us to wait on him,
but I couldn’t hold dat mule, and I wan’t trying to hold him! I was
gitting away from dar!

"When us come togedder, us was a mile from whar us done been, den us had
to decide what to do. Isham said for us to go wid him, and Green said
no, us nearer to his house; but us wan’t near to nobody and I was so
scared, hadn’t been for Alice, I’d a jes’ stayed right whar us was ’tell
sun-up. I said, ’No, every man better take keer his own self,’ en us
did. When I got home, I didn’t take nothing off dat mule but myself. I
jes’ left him standing at de do’ wid de saddle on. What skeered Green
so, was a man, he said, what was ridin’ right ’side him en didn’t have
no head! ’Twas a good thing he didn’t tell me dat den, I’d jes’ nacherly
drap dead!

"No’m, I don’t ’zackly believes in ghosties, but I heared Mr. Marshall
Lee say he was riding on home one night and a woman stepped out in de
road and say: ’Marshall, let me ride.’ He say: ’My hoss won’t tote
double.’ She say: ’Yes it will,’ and she jump up behind him, and dat
hoss bucked and jumped nigh ’bout from under him, but when he got home,
she wan’t dere. He say, his sister had jes’ died and it mout been her.

"’Nother time, one Friday night, Alice say us better git a ’possum for
Sunday. She say she didn’t want none caught atter midnight on Sadday. I
went down whar I knowed dey was ’simmons, and dem dogs never treed
nothing; dey jes’ run ’round dat ’simmon tree lak dey gone crazy. I’m
telling you de troof, somepin’ jump outer dat tree, had a head back’erds
and for’erds and look lak a flame shooting out it eyes! ’Twan’t lak no
possum I ever seed, ’twan’t lak nothing. Dem dogs, Liz and Roger en
Cuba, made a bluge at me. Cotton was waist high, and I run down de
cotton row and cross de road and dey trail me. I say: ’What ail you,
dogs?’ And dey jes’ come on a-barkin’, and dey run me to de bridge over
Konkabyer. So I clumb on de banisters. I seed dey had my trail an dey
gonna ketch me, so I turn ’round and tore out for de slough. Dey lost my
trail dere and when I got home, ’bout daylight, de thorns and de briars
and all done tore my clothes plum off me. ’Twas t’ree days ’fore I ever
seed dem dogs ag’in.

"And I kin tell you somepin’ else. It’s jes’ lak I say, I’s always been
a hunter, en one night I went down in de post oak woods hunting by
myself. Dis is a fact; ’tain’t no lie. It’s what I done. I had a mighty
good dog, and I jes’ kept walking and walking, and I got mighty nigh to
Mr. Redhead Jim Lee’s place, and I walked on and atter while I seed I’d
lost my dog. I couldn’t see him nowhar and I couldn’t hear him nowhar,
and den somepin’ say to me, jes’ lak dis: ’Josh, blow your horn!’ Jes’
lak dat, lak somebody talking to me. Well I give three loud, long blows
and set dere awhile longer but dat dog didn’t come. Co’se I knowed he’d
come sometime, and so I jes’ set dere on dat log and I jes’ turned a
fool, I reckon, but ’twas jes’ lak somebody talking to me, lak it
'peared to me was whispering: ’Josh, you out here in dese woods by
yo’self. You blowed dat horn and your enemy heard you. You’s a fool, you
is.’ And I whispered back: ’Dat’s a fact.’ I couldn’t hear what it was
a-whispering to me, but us jes’ talk back to one ’nuther, and ’bout dat
time I look up and here come three men ridin’ on new saddles wid shiny
buckles gwine, ’squeechy, squeechy’, jes’ lak dat. I hears de hosses
feed jes’ as nachel as could be. I thought sho I seed ’em, and it ’pears
to look clean outer reason, but dem men come riding right on up to me,
and I jump over dat log and lay down flat on de other side, and it look
lak I could see right through dat log and heard ’em say: ’Dar he is, dar
he is’, and I seed ’em p’inting dey finger right whar I was. I knowed
dem hosses gwineter step over de log on top me, and I’s telling you de
troof, I jump up from ’hind dat log and run ’bout two miles, and if it
hadn’t been for dat slough, I don’t know whar I’d a went. I come to
myself in de middle of dat water, up to hyar, waist high, and dar was my
dog, old Cuba, done treed a ’possum.

"De fust thing I ’members ’bout slave’y time, I wan’t nothing but a boy,
'bout fifteen I reckon, dat’s what Marse Johnnie Horn say. Us belong to
Marse Ike Horn, Marse Johnnie’s pa, right here on dis place whar us is
now, but dis here didn’t belong to me den, dis here was all Marse Ike’s
place. Marse Ike’s gin got outer fix and we couldn’t get it fixed.
Colonel Lee had two gins and one of ’em was jes’ below old Turner house.
Recolleck a big old hickory tree? Well dar’s whar it was.

"I was plenty big ’nough to drive de mules to de gin. Set on de lever
and drive ’em, jes lak a ’lasses mill, so dat night Marse Ike told us he
want everybody go wid him to Colonel Lee’s gin nex’ morning, and didn’t
want nobody to git out and go ahead of him. Dat held up de ginning; made
us not go to de ginhouse tell sunup.

"Us got de mules and jes’ waited. ’Twixt daylight and sunup, us all
standing dar at de gate and we heared a little fine horn up de road. Us
didn’t know what it meant coming to de house. And bimeby Mr. Beesley,
what live not fur from Marse Ike, he rode up and had five dogs, five
nigger dogs, what dey call ’em, and soon as he come, Marse Ike’s hoss
was saddled up and Marse Ike and him rode off down de road and de dogs
wid em, ’head of us. Us followed ’long behind ’em, stay close as dey
'low us, to see what dey was up to. When dey got close to de ginhouse,
ginhouse right ’side de road, dey stop us and Mr. Beesley told old Brown
to go ahead. Old Brown was de lead dog and had a bell on him and dey was
fasten togedder wid a rod, jes’ lak steers. He turn ’em loose, and den
he popped de whip and hollered at old Brown and told him ’nigger’. Old
Brown hollered lak he hit. He want to go. And dey was a fence on bofe
sides made it a lane, so he put old Brown over de fence on de ginhouse
side, and told Brown to ’go ahead’. He went ahead and run all aroun’ de
ginhouse and dey let him in de gin-room and he grabbled in de cottonseed
in a hole.

"Den somebody holler ’Guinea Jim’, I looks and I didn’t see him. Didn’t
nobody see him, but dey know dat’s whar he been hiding. Mr. Beesley told
old Brown he jes’ fooling him, and Old Brown holler ag’in, lak he
killing him, and Mr. Beesley say: ’Go git dat nigger’ and old Brown
started ’way from dar lak he hadn’t been hunting nothing, but he went
aroun’ and aroun’ dat gin and Mr. Beesley told him he hatter do better
dan dat or he’d kill him, ’cause he hadn’t come dar for nothing.

"Brown made a circle aroun’ dat gin ’way down to de fence dat time, and
he was so fat he couldn’t git through de fence. You know what sort of
fence, a rail fence it was. Den he stop and bark for help. Now I seed
dis wid my own eyes. Dey put Brown on top de fence and he jump way out
in de road, didn’t stay on de fence. He jump and run up and down in de
road, and couldn’t find no scent of Jim. You knows how dey used to make
dem rail fences?

"Well, Brown come back dar, and dis is de trufe, so help me Gawd. He
bark, look lak, for dem to lift him back up on de fence, and bless God,
if dat dog didn’t walk dat rail fence lak he walking a log, as fur as
from here to dat gate yonder, and track Jim jes’ lak he was on de
groun’. He fell off once, and dey had to put him back, and he run his
track right on to whar Jim jumped off de fence way out in de road. Old
Brown run right cross de road to de other fence and treed ag’in on
t’other side de road toward Konkabia. Old Brown walk de fence on dat
side de road a good piece, jes’ lak he done on de other side, and dem
other dogs, he hadn’t never turned dem loose.

"When Brown he jump off dat fence, he jump jes’ as fur as he kin on de
fiel’ side, lak he gwine ketch Jim lak a gnat or somepin’ and he never
stop barking no more, jes’ lak he jumping a rabbit. Den, Mr. Beesley
turn dem other dogs loose dat he hadn’t never turned loose, ’ca’se he
say old Brown done got de thing straight. And he had it straight. Dem
dogs run dat track right on down to Konkabia and crossed it to de
Blacksher side. Dey was a big old straw field dar den and dey cross it
and come on through dat field, all dem dogs barkin’ jes’ lak dey looking
at Jim. ’Reckley, dey come up on Jim running wid a pine brush tied
behind him to drag his scent away, but it didn’t bother old Brown.

"When dem dogs ’gin to push him, Jim drap de brush and runned back
toward Konkabia. Now on Konkabia dere used to be beavers worse den on
Sucarnatchee now. Dey was a big beaver dam ’twixt de bridge and de Hale
place, and Jim run to dat beaver dam. You know when beavers build dey
dam, dey cut down trees and let ’em fall in de creek, and pull in trash
en brush same as folks, to dam de water up dar tell its knee-deep. De
dogs seen him, old Brown looking at him, jes’ ’fore he jump in ’bove de
dam right ’mongst de trash and things dey’d drug in dar. Brown seed him
and he jump in right behind him. Jim jes’ dive down under de raff, en
let he nose stick outer de water. Every once in a while Jim he put he
head down under, he holding to a pole down dar, and once Mr. Beesley
seed him, he jes’ let him stay dar.

"Brown would swim ’bout ’mongst de brush, backerds and for’erds, and
terreckly Mr. Beesley tole old Brown, ’Go git him.’ Den all de men got
poles and dug ’bout in de raff hunting him. Dey knowed he was dar, en
Marse Ike had a pole giggen aroun’ trying to find him too. Den he told
Mr. Beesley to give him de hatchet and let him fix he pole. He sharpen
de pole right sharp, den Marse Ike start to jug aroun’ wid de pole, and
he kinder laugh to hisse’f, ’ca’se he knowed he done found Jim. ’Bout
dat time Jim poke he head up and say: ’Dis here me’, and everybody
holler. Den he ax ’em please, for God’s sake, don’t let dem dogs git
him. Dey told him come on out.

"You see, Jim belonged to Miss Mary Lee, Mr. John Lee’s Ma, and his Pa
was kilt in de war, so Mr. Beesley was looking out for her. Well, dey
took Jim outer dar, and Mr. Beesley whipped him a little and told him:
'Jim, you put up a pretty good fight and I’s gwine to give you a start
for a run wid de dogs.’

"Jim took out towards Miss Mary’s, and Mr. Beesley helt old Brown as
long as he could. Dey caught Jim and bit him right smart. You see dey
had to let em bite him a little to satisfy de dogs. Jim could have made
it, ’cept he was all hot and wore out.

"Dat’s ’bout all I knows, ’cept us belonged to Marse Ike Horn, and fust
us belonged to Mr. Price Williams, what run de hotel in Livingston. He
took my gran’ma to Mobile, den he died. Us Ma belonged to dey two
chillun, Miss Nancy Gulley, Mr. Jake’s wife, en Miss Burt Blakeney.
Marse Ike Horn was dey uncle, and us all come ’round to him, and us been
here ever since. My mammy was Ann Campbell, and my pappy was John Horn,
and us ain’t never had no trouble wid nobody ’bout nothing.

"We’s having a barbecue on de fo’th of July and us wants you to come
down to it, if Alice gits along well, and I’s gwine tell you ’bout Rod
and Big John, and John Graverson when dey runned away and about how old
man Jim Devers, Alice’s step-pa, hid em in de cave under he house whar
dey had as nice hams as I ever et, co’se a little tainted, but sho was
good. Dem niggers was fat as beavers, jes’ settin’ dar eatin’ dat meat.

"And ’bout de time Marse Ike slip up on a heap of niggers at a frolic
'twixt Sumterville and Livingston and put a end to de frolic. De niggers
having a big dance, and Marse Ike and de patterrollers having a big run,
said dey wanted to have some fun, and dey did. Said he eased up on ’em
wid a white sheet ’round him and a big brush in he hand, and somehow or
'nother, dey didn’t see him tell he spoke. Den he holler ’By God, I’m
bird-blinding,’ and he say dem niggers tore down dem dirt chimleys and
run t’rough dat house. He say he ain’t never heerd sich a fuss in a corn
field in his born days. What he mean ’bout bird-blindin’? When you goes
in de canebrake it so thick, you takes a light to shine de bird’s eyes
and blind ’em, den you kin ketch ’em. Dat what he call bird-blindin’.
Yassum, Marse Ike in dat too. He couldn’t stand for ’em to have no fun
'thout he in it.

"Come back on de fo’th of July, and I’s gwine tell you some sho-nuff
tales. You sort of caught me when my min’ wa’n’t zackly on it. I ain’t
had no sleep, jes’ settin’ ’side de bed by Alice, ketching a nod now and
den. I’s too sleepy to sing you no song, but one I laks is dis: It suits
me now in my age:

    My lates’ sun is sinking fas’
    My race in nearly run,
    My strongs’ trial now is pas’,
    My triump’ jes’ begun.

"You come back and I’ll sing de res’, I’s got to see ’bout things now."