"Go on see if you can find one or two
plum on duh tree. I been want to go to town wid you--dat all right
daughter. (He pronounces it Dater--long Italian 'A') Chillun, ain't find
duh plum, enty? Dem Sandy Island people come and clean the tree. Too
sorry wonneh ain't get them plum!

"Stella gone in creek fishing. Him and Lula gone--Lula McCoy. You say
me?" (To neighbor walking up) "Four men been here load they car up wid
hand. How come you ain't gone to the bacco?" (To work in the tobacco
fields in truck sent to find hands)

Pauline Pyatt: "If they ain't pay my price, I ain't going leave home. I
ain't gone for 75¢ a day. Feenie Deas gone yestiddy."

Uncle Ben: "Near bout blind. Couldn't see out no eye nor nare (neither)
one o' my eye. Doctor put sumptin in 'em do me too much o' good. How I
is? Fall out? Deth come I fix! Don't know bout you!"

Pauline: "I fix!"

Mary Gary: "You fix, Uncle Ben?"

Uncle Ben: "I gwine fix!"

Pauline: "You ain't fix?"

Uncle Ben: "I fix all right! I going fudder dan duh grave!"

Pauline: "I been Tarbox." (To Mr. Tarbox)

Uncle Ben: "Down by Gallie?" (Gallie's house)

Pauline: "I ain't see nobody. What you see?"

Uncle Ben: "Ain't see nobody tall--tall--."

Pauline: "Alice! I see Alice!"

Uncle Ben: "Ain't see nobody else?"

Pauline: "Nobody else!"

Uncle Ben: "Nobody else?"

Pauline: "Nobody else. She by herself!"

<tb>

Uncle Ben Reminisces

"Fore freedom? Fore freedom? Well now, fore freedom we were treated by
our former owners I will say good--cording to situation of time. Every
year when Massa and Missus gone mountains, they call up obersheer
(overseer) and say, 'Don't treat them anyway severe. Don't beat them.
Don't maul them.' (Mr. Heminingway been severe.)

"Anybody steal rice and they beat them, Miss Bessie cry and say, 'Let
'em have rice! My rice--my nigger!'

"Brookgreen and Springfield every Sunday morning, every gal and the
young one must dress up and go to the yard and Miss Bessis give 'em
candy. Don't want too much o' beating. Glad to see young women dance.
But some cruel to the colored. Some on 'Prospect,'--'Hermitage'--and
'Woodland' treat all right.

"I know the Yankee boat come to Inlet and went to Oaks sea-shore with
load of cotton. Band of our sojer gone--(Rebs--'OUR sojer!), and Yankee
sojer come off in a yawl boat and our sojer caught two of them men and
they hang that man to Oaks sea-shore. And when the Yankee find out--do
my Lord! A stir been! A stir here! Shell clean to Sandy Island! Knock
hole through the sick-house (at Brookgreen!) Pump! Well, ain't it? Brick
work pump. Well. Handle. You turn! Turn. One bucket gone up; one gone
down. Ward take care of his nigger, sho! Best man own slave! Ward and
Ploughdon sho treat they nigger right! Live 'Laurel Hill.'

"Ward had on Prospect and Brookgreen. You know what I see? Right there
to Oaks sea-sho after them people done that murdering with that man?
Take all the slave, get on flat and gone out way of shell. Gone sand
hole. Take all the people from Brookgreen and Springfield--and carry dem
to Marlboro. Boat tow flat. Carmichael came through and established the
freedom through here. They come back from Marlboro where they refugee to
and Maham Ward come back on the flat. And this Ward, share out the
rice--broke open barn. We people? Anything like a silver, bury right
there in that garden! Right to Brookgreen garden, what Hontington got
now. All Ward thing bury there. Them old time people kill you--you
meddle them thing. Cry out, 'Massa Ting!' You better let 'em stay there!

"After Freedom Miss Bessie gone to she house in Charston--Rutledge
Street Charston. And you could see way out in ocean.

"My fadder--him and Uncle Dan'l and Uncle Summer uster been fiddler.
Gone all round when the white people gone to Prospect to ball and sich
as that. Dem white people didn't treat you so brutish! Dem obersheer!"
(Aside) "Wonder Christ sake why Lula stay out that creek so long!"

Pauline: "Fine season for corn!"

Ben: "Sho is!"

(Uncle Ben keeps a little grocery and fruit for sell. Customer comes)

"Missus, Take twenty cent out a dollar."

Pauline: "My grand-mother in that storm. They leave that Thursday. I
been to Oaks. When Flagg storm wuz. Richmond come off Magnolia beach to
Oaks Plantation and get the washing--the missus clean clothes. Had to
swim the horse off the beach to get the clothes. I been on the beach
Thursday--and cousin Joshuaway. Pony Myers daughter born in Brookgreen
street day of storm. Pony Myers wife name Adele. Marse Arthur had one
little twin. Joshua Stuart and Ben find dem to the end of Myrtle Beach.
Arthur twin baby--bout that high--little walking chillun. Look how
curious thing is! Them two chillun drown and find to the foot of Myrtle
Beach! (fifteen or twenty miles north). Find Tom Duncan mother. Find
Francis mother--Francis Gadsden. Doctor Ward pa--find him by duh vest.
Vest sticking out duh mud. Watch going. My grand-mother was keep a
walking from door to door.

"Find a mer-maid and kept to Magnolia." (Pauline said, 'mere-maid')
"Doctor Ward and dem shut 'em up a month. Mer-maid. Had a storm ball.
Keep a turning round. Keep a telling him (Dr. Arthur) storm coming. He
wouldn't b'lieve 'em. (Barometer--called by Uncle Isaac's wife,
gatekeeper at Brookgreen, chronometer.) He wouldn't b'lieve. And a
cussing man! All the time cuss! Mere-maid got a forked tail just like
shark. From here down (illustrating by pantomine) all blue scale like a
cat-fish. Pretty people! Pretty a white woman as you ever lay your eye
on."

Ben: "Pretty, enty?"

Pauline: "Dem stay in sea. Dey walk--slide long on tail." (twisting from
her waist to illustrate.) Pretty. From they waist down to tail blue
scale. You got a bathing house on beach. Leave bread in there. They sho
eat bread.

"Marse Allard say top of the barn fly off. Cat jump and on it! And
horse too. And he jump too and tide bring 'em to Brookgreen.

"Joshuaway Stuart been plantation carpenter. He made one box for the
twin what drown and Colonel Mortimer bring one from Georgetown."

(Aunt Stella and Lula arriving from fishing trip)

"What ketch?"

Lula: "Get some catty!" (cat-fish) "Mary, you dress down!"

Mary: "I gwine ketch me a fellow! (Looking in bucket) Gosh! Did got a
good mess!"

Lula: "Little fellow."

Mary: "Rather eat them than large one."

Pauline: "What yinnah nuse for bait?"

Lula: "Swimp."

Pauline: "How you catch 'em?"

Lula: "Take a crocus and dip 'em up."

Pauline: "I gwine try to-morrow."

Lula: "To-morrow been Sundy! How old I is? Have to put a guess on 'em.
Bout fifty I guess. Flagg storm? That big one? When the storm wuz, I wuz
seven year old."

(Discuss Reb time and Flagg storm.)

Pauline: "Yes. Wind bring young Allard in to Uncle Joshuaway Stuart
field right down there where Cindy Poinsett now. Joshuaway been Cindy
Pa.

"Doctor Ward shut that mere-maid up. He been in that! When that storm
wuz, he wuzn't old. I go there now and talk bout that storm and he eye
get full o' water. Looker his Papa clothes. Got 'em all pack in trunk. I
never shee 'um court myself. Every time I shee 'um with a crowd o' man.

"Long as he have mere-maid shut up, it rain! People gone there to look
at 'em. Long as keep 'em shut up it rain. That time rain thirty days.
That just fore Flagg storm." (Looking toward creek) "Yonder Stella,
wonneh, now!"

(Uncle Ben gave each white child a little cake--then gave, from his
hand, hunks of corn bread to each colored woman.)

     Conversation taken down on Uncle Ben Horry's porch where he sat
     awaiting the return of Aunt Stella who had gone 'in the creek' to
     'catch a mess o' fish.' Murrells Inlet, S.C. June 15, 1937.
