


Bryant Huff was the son of Janie and Daniel Huff who were born on
neighboring plantations between Camack and Augusta. They were married
while they still belonged to separate owners, but when "Marse" Jesse
Rigerson, to whom Janie belonged, decided to move, he bought Daniel in
order that he might live with his wife and family. They moved to Warren
County and it was here that Bryant was born. He was one of twelve
children.

Bryant's early life was not one to inspire pleasant memories for his
master, a highly educated man; ardent church worker, had a cruel nature
and a temper that knew no bounds. Owning 800 acres of land in a fairly
level section, he ruled his small kingdom with an iron hand. Bryant's
father, Daniel, was the only man who did not fear "Marse" Rigerson.

The quarters consisted of poorly constructed cabins with worse
interiors. There were no beds, only bunks made of two poles balancing
sides nailed to the walls. Rags and old clothing served as a mattress
and the other furniture was equally bad. Food was cooked on an open
fireplace and the frying pan was the most important utensil; vegetables
were boiled in a swinging kettle. The griddle stood several inches from
the floor, on three small pegs. Through the middle a "pin" was placed so
that the griddle might revolve as the bread etc., cooked on the side
near the hottest part of the fire. Matches, a luxury, were then sold in
small boxes the size of the average snuff box at ten cents per box.

All the slaves worked from sunrise to sunset; the majority did field
work. Women, as well as men, shared farm work. Small boys not old enough
to be sent to the field, minded horses, drove cows to and from the
pasture, and did chores around the "big house". A few women prepared
meals and supervised a group of younger girls who did general work in
the big house.

Sunday was the only day of rest and usually all the adults attended
church. On this plantation a church with a colored Minister was provided
and services, while conducted on the same order as those of the white
churches, were much longer. Generally children were not allowed to
attend church, but occasionally this privilege was granted to one. Huff
recalls vividly his first visit to Sunday services. Being very small and
eager to attend he sat quietly by his mother's side and gazed with
wonder at the minister and congregation. An emotional outburst was part
of the services and so many of the "sisters" got "happy" that the child,
not having witnessed such a scene before, was frightened; as the number
of shouters increased, he ran from the building screaming in terror.

Of the 12 children in his family, 2 were sold. The eldest child,
Harriet, owned by a Judge who lived on a neighboring plantation,
returned to the family after Emancipation. The father left home in a fit
of anger because one of his children had been whipped. The master,
knowing how devoted he was to his wife, placed her and her infant child
in jail. Shortly afterward, the father returned and was allowed to visit
his wife and to go unmolested. A few weeks later he came back to the
jail, and was allowed to enter, as before, but when ready to leave, was
told that he was there for safe keeping. The next day, he and his son,
Johnie, were sold to some speculators who promised to carry them so far
away that they could not return. As Daniel left, he told his wife to
wait for him to return, whether it be months or years. She grieved over
his departure and refused, although urged, to marry again. A few months
before the close of the Civil War, her husband appeared and remained on
the plantation until emancipation. Johnie was accidently killed shortly
after his departure.

While most of the punishment was given by the "patty-roller" and the
Master, in some instances overseers were allowed to administer it. Some
of these overseers were Negroes and occasionally there was trouble when
they attempted to punish another slave. Huff recalls having seen one of
these "bosses" approach his mother as she toiled in the field and
questioned her regarding her whereabouts on the previous evening. She
refused to answer and as he approached her in a threatening manner, she
threw piles of twigs upon him. (She was loading a wagon with small limbs
cut from trees on "new ground"). He fled in terror. That night, as the
mother and her children were seated in their cabin, the same man
accompanied by their Master entered, tied her hands and led her from the
home. She was carried quite a distance down the road and severely
beaten.

Food was provided by the Master who gave it out in regular weekly
allotments. Collard greens, peas, smoked meat and corn bread were the
chief items on all menus. On Sundays a small amount of flour for
biscuits and some coffee was given; buttermilk was always plentiful.
Holidays were usually synonymous with barbecue when large hogs and
beeves were killed and an ample supply of fresh meat was given each
person. As all food was raised on the plantation, everyone had plenty.

Cloth spun from cotton produced at home was woven into the material
under the watchful eye of the mistress, afterwards being cut into
dresses for the women, shirts and trousers for men. Winter garments were
made of wool from home raised sheep. Some of this home-spun material was
colored with dye made from powdered red rocks. With a shoe hammer, last,
pegs (instead of nails) and a standard pattern slave cobblers fashioned
shoes from the hides of their master's cattle. They were no models of
beauty, but strong, durable shoes designed for hard wear.

Bryant was not superstitious, although he did sometimes wonder when
"signs" proved true. Superstition, however, had a strong grip on slave
life. A fellow slave named Andy was a seasoned runaway and the overseer
usually set the hounds after him. (Going to a fortune teller Andy
secured a "hound" which caused all dogs to be friendly with him. There
after when the hounds were set upon him, he played with them, turned
their ears inside out, and sent them back to their owner.)

The attitude of the slaves toward freedom varied and as they were not
allowed to discuss it, their hope was veiled in such expressions as the
"LORD will provide". Some were even afraid to settle any statement and
silently prayed that their release would come soon. Some feared that
something might prevent their emancipation so they ran away and joined
the Yankee Army, hoping to be able to destroy their former master.

During this time masters suffered as well as their slaves, for many of
their sons went gaily forth to battle and were never heard of again.
Simpson Rigerson, son of "Marse" Jesse Rigerson, was lost to his
parents. A younger son, who lost his right hand while "helping" feed
cane to a grinder, is the only member of the family now living.

Sorrow did not break this slaves group and they soon learned to sing
away their troubles. One song which gives some light on their attitude
toward the government went as follows:

  I.    Jeff Davis rode the gray horse
        Ole Lincoln rode the mule
        Jeff Davis is the gentleman
        Ole Lincoln is the fool

        Chorus:

        I'll lay ten dollars down
        I'll count it one by one.
        I'll give ten dollars to know the man
        Who struck Peter Butler's son.

  II.   I lay down in my bed
        I lay down in no dread
        Conscript come and took me
        And dragged me from my bed.

  III.  I went down a new cut road
        She went down the lane
        I turned my back upon her
        And 'long come Liza Jane.

After freedom was declared, Bryant Huff's family moved several miles
from the Rigerson plantation to one owned by an elderly woman. They ran
from a mean master but their flight was a "leap from the frying pan into
the fire", for this woman proved even worse than their former master. At
the close of the war the K.K.K. was very active and their fearful
exploits made them the terror of the slaves. A band of the latter was
organized to attempt to curb the K.K.K. activities. Neither gang knew
who was a member of the other, but their clashes were frequent. One
night the K.K.K. appeared at the Huff cabin and when admitted took the
father, an uncle, and a man named Mansfield from the house. After
forcing the father to break a gun which he had borrowed from Mr.
Rigerson, they beat him so brutally that his arm was broken. The uncle,
a minister who preached a type of doctrine that they liked, was
unharmed. Mansfield, accused of being a member of the anti-K.K.K. gang,
was beaten unmercifully. While this was being done, two members of the
gang returned to the house where they searched the back room (men slept
in the front room, the women and children in the rear) to see if any
adults were secreted there. The small boys under the bed said "Don't
harm us, we're only children". After this outrage, done at the request
of the mistress, the Huff family moved back to the Rigerson plantation.

Mr. Rigerson's harsh disposition was broken after the Civil War ended
and he repented of his severe treatment of his former slaves. Daniel
Huff whom he had despised and feared, became his best friend who nursed
him until death. Huff's wife received three acres of ground and two
houses from her former master who also gave her an apology for his past
meanness and stated that he wished to provide her with a home for life.

During this period martial law prevailed in the South. The Yankee
troops, placed in every town, were the only police present and all cases
from the county were presented to them for settlement.

A few years after emancipation, Bryant then a young man, ran away from
home and apprenticed himself to a physician who became interested in his
thirst for knowledge and gave him an opportunity to attend school.
After several years of hard study, he went before the board of examiners
in order to teach. After 2 examinations he was immediately appointed to
teach at the school where he had once been a pupil.

Huff, now on aged man, is dependent upon local relief for his
sustenance. He is able to do light work like sweeping yards and is a
very good umbrella mender and shoe repairer, but is not able to go in
search of work. He has smoked since he was a young man and has never
taken especial care of his health, so his long life may be attributed to
a strong constitution.
