Mrs. Camilla Jackson doesn't know how old she is, but is so very old
that she almost never leaves her chair. She wears a white rag around her
head and is always spotlessly clean. She speaks distinctly; but her
memory is a little slow, due to her old age. The events related were
given only after she had thought them over carefully, for, as she
stated, she did not wish to tell anything but the truth. She lives in a
back room of a large house and is cared for by other people in the
house.

She was born in Decatur, Georgia, the daughter of Charlotte and Joe
Hoyle, and the tenth child of 18 children. Her family included her
mother and father, a grandmother and 17 sisters and brothers. As far as
she can remember, her family always belonged to Mr. Peter Hoyle, who was
a doctor.

Dr. Hoyle's family included his wife, three boys, and three girls. He
owned a very large plantation, and a large number of a slaves, probably
75 or more. All of them were required to work in the fields and tend the
crops, which consisted mostly of sugar cane and cotton. Syrup was made
from the sugar cane. Mrs. Jackson remembers quite well that everyone was
required to work in the fields, but not until Dr. Hoyle, who was a kind
master, was sure that they were old enough. She was about 12 years old
when she was given a job in the house, operating the fly-brush. The
fly-brush was constructed so that a piece of cloth, fastened on a wooden
frame with hinges, could be pulled back and forth with a cord. This
constant fanning kept the room clear of flies. As she related this, she
smiled to herself as if her job was particularly amusing.

Dr. Hoyle did not find it necessary to hire out any of his slaves as he
had enough work to keep them all busy. She frequently said that her
master was a kind man and never punished unnecessarily. It was very
seldom that he used the whip. His slaves respected him for his kindness
and tried to please him. As a result of his good treatment Dr. Hoyle
never found it necessary to sell any one of his slaves. Once she
hesitated and seemed to go into a deep study over something. A few
minutes later she related the incident of the selling of a woman slave.
This woman gave birth to a baby out of wedlock and, since Dr. Hoyle was
a firm believer in marriage, he immediately sold her, to prevent further
trouble. Mrs. Hoyle was not as kind as her husband, and at times was
cruel to the slaves.

Mrs. Jackson clearly related the method of courtship and marriage on her
master's plantation. Dr. Hoyle never selected the mates for his slaves
but left it to each person to chose whomever he wished. However, the
selection would have to be made from among the slaves on some of his
friends plantations. They were not allowed to chose anyone on their own
plantation. The person chosen was allowed to call on Sundays after
getting a "pass" from his master. She told how courtship was carried on
in those days. A young man courted the girl in the presence of the
parents. Every now and then he would be seen looking at the clock. When
he left, the mother would go to the door with him. When the master was
properly notified of the intended marriage, he would prepare a feast and
call in his own preacher to perform the ceremony. After the ceremony
everybody was allowed to take part in the feast. When Mrs. Jackson's
oldest sister married the master roasted a pig and stuck a red apple in
its mouth. She smiled over this incident.

A slave's home life was very simple. After work hours they were allowed
to visit other plantations; however, they could not visit any plantation
unless their master was friendly with the owner of this particular
plantation. One of the most enjoyable affairs in those days was the
quilting party. Every night they would assemble at some particular house
and help that person to finish her quilts. The next night, a visit would
be made to some one else's home and so on, until everyone had a
sufficient amount of bed-clothing made for the winter. Besides, this was
an excellent chance to get together for a pleasant time and discuss the
latest gossip. Most friendly calls were made on Sunday, after securing a
"pass". This "pass" was very necessary to go from one plantation to
another.

Slaves did not have to prepare their food during the week. Their food
was brought to them in pails from the "big house". (The master's house
was called the "big house".) On Sundays they were given groceries to
prepare their own meals. Mrs. Jackson remembers the bread that was made
from "shorts". "Shorts" was the name given to a second grade of flour,
similar to whole wheat. The first grade was always used in the master's
house. As a whole, Dr. Hoyle gave his slaves enough food; however, on
several occasions she remembers that a friend of her mother's, who lived
on the adjoining plantation, handed pans of food over the fence to them.

Slaves were never given spending money but her grandmother was very
thrifty and managed to earn a little money. This was done by collecting
all the rags she could find and then carrying them to town in an oxcart
to sell them. Old women used oxcarts because oxen would not run away.

She smiled when asked if she had ever worn a hoop skirt. "Yes, child",
she replied, "I have worn hoop skirts. They were the fad in those days."
She related how her sister made hoop skirts by cutting slits in the hem
of the skirt, and running a hoop through it. "I can remember the cloth
that was made on the spinning wheel", she said. She told how she had
turned the reel many a day and spun the thread. She could not clearly
relate the construction of a spinning wheel.

Everyone, particularly the older people, was required to attend church.
For Christmas everyone was given a special Sunday suit to wear to
church. The slaves did not have a separate church of their own but were
allowed to attend the white church and occupy the balcony. Mrs. Jackson
began to laugh outright over the memory of a funny yet serious incident
that occurred in church one Sunday. She had a little white girl friend
with whom she played every day. One Sunday she looked over the balcony
and saw her in the audience below. They both began a little game of
looking and snatching back their heads. Finally she leaned over too far
and fell over the balcony into the white audience below. She hurt
herself pretty badly and cried so much that the service was broken up
for that day. Dr. Hoyle carried her home and administered the proper
treatment. After this incident she didn't look over balconies anymore.

Before she could learn anything definite the Civil War had begun and she
began to see soldiers going here and there dressed in their uniforms.
One event stands out clearly in her memory and that was the time the
master took all of his slaves and as many of his possession as he could
and went to Camp Ground, Georgia, to dodge the Yankee soldiers. After
the attack on Decatur, they returned to find all of the slave quarters
torn down. The master's house, which had 13 rooms, was still standing.
Most of the slaves had to stay in the "big house" until their homes
could be rebuilt. Many were still living in the master's house when the
papers were read telling them they were free. Dr. Hoyle asked his slaves
to remain and he would pay them for their services. Her family remained
with Dr. Hoyle's family one year after freedom. Afterwards they moved to
Atlanta, where she has lived practically all of her life. She married
immediately after freedom and proudly spoke of being the first person to
wed in the old "Big Bethel Church". She is now alone without sister,
brother, or child; but even at her old age she is unusually optimistic
and continues to enjoy life. She believes in serving God and living a
clean honest life. She has just one desire, and that is to enter the
Kingdom of Heaven someday.
