


"Mother said I was born the same year peace was declared. I was born
before the Civil War close, I reckon. I was born in Tunica,
Mississippi. Mother belong to Mistress Cornelia and Master John Hood.
He come from Alabama in wagons and brought mother and whole lot of
'em, she said, to Tunica, Mississippi. My mother and father never
sold. They told me that. She said she was with the master and he give
her to father. He ask her did she want him and ask him if he want her.
They lived on joint places. They slept together on Wednesday and
Saturday nights. He stayed at Hood's place on Sunday. They was owned
by different masters. They didn't never say 'bout stepping over no
broom. He was a Prince. When he died she married a man named Russell.
I never heard her say what his name was. My father was Mathew Prince.
They was both field hands. I never knowed my father. I called my
stepfather popper. I always did say mother.

"Mother said her master didn't tell them it was freedom. Other folks
got told in August. They passed it 'round secretly. Some Yankees come
asked if they was getting paid for picking cotton in September. They
told their master. They told the Yankees 'yes' 'cause they was afraid
they would be run off and no place to go. They said Master Hood paid
them well for their work at cotton selling time. He never promised
them nothing. She said he never told one of them to leave or to stay.
He let 'em be. I reckon they got fed. I wore cotton sack dresses. It
wasn't bagging. It was heavy stiff cloth.

"Mother and her second husband come to Forrest City. They hoped they
could do better. I come too. I worked in the field all my whole life
'cepting six years I worked in a laundry. I washed and ironed. I am a
fine ironer. If I was younger I could get all the mens' shirts I could
do now. I do a few but I got neuralgia in my arms and shoulders.

"I don't believe in talking 'bout my race. They always been lazy folks
and smart folks, and they still is. The present times is good for me.
I'm so thankful. I get ten dollars and some help, not much. I don't go
after it. I let some that don't get much as I get have it. I told 'em
to do that way."
