JAMES JACKSON, 87, was born a slave to the Alexander family, in
     Caddo Parish, La. When he was about two, his master moved to Travis
     County, Texas. A short time later he and his two brothers were
     stolen and sold to Dr. Duvall, in Bastrop Co., Texas. He worked
     around Austin till he married, when he moved to Taylor and then to
     Kaufman. In 1929 he went to Fort Worth where he has lived ever
     since.


"I was bo'n at Caddo Parish, dats in Louisiana, on de Doc Alexander
plantation. My mother says I was bo'n on de 18th day of December, in de
year of 1850. I guess dat's right, 'cause I's 87 years ole dis comin'
December.

"Jus' 'bout dat time dey started shippin' de darkies to Texas. My
marster moved to Travis County, Texas, and tuk all his slaves wid him. I
was too young to 'member, but my mother, she told me 'bout it.

"It wasn' long after we was on Marster Alexander's new place in Travis
County, till one night a man rode up on a hoss and stole me and my two
brothers and rode away wid us. He tuk us to Bastrop County and sold us
to Doc Duvall. Marster Duvall sold my brother right after he bought us,
but me and John, we stayed wid him till de slaves was freed.

"On Marster Duvall's plantation de slaves all lived in log cabins back
of de big house. Dey was one room, two rooms and three room cabins,
dependin' on de size of de family. Most had dirt floors, but some of 'em
had log slabs. We had dese ole wooden beds wid a rope stretch 'cross de
bottom and a mattress of straw or cotton dat de niggers got in de fiel'.
We had lots to eat, like biscuit, cornbread, meat and sich stuff. Most
times dey made coffee outta parch cornmeal. We had gardens and raised
most of de stuff to eat.

"I herds sheep and is houseboy most of de time. When I was ole enough, I
picks cotton. I was jus' learnin' when de slaves was freed. Marster
Duvall had over 500 acres in cotton and he kep' us in de fiel' all de
time, 'cept Saturday afternoon and Sunday.

"Dey had meetin' and dances Saturday nights. I was too young to 'member
jus' what de songs was, but dey had a fiddle and played all night long.
On ever' Sunday de niggers went to Church in de evenin'. Dey had a white
preacher in de mornin' and a cullud preacher in de evenin'.

"Marster Duvall would whip de niggers who was disobedience and he jus'
call dem up and ask dem what was de trouble, den he would whip dem wid a
cowhide or a rope whip. We could go anywhere iffen we had a pass, but if
we didn' de paddlerollers would ketch us. They was kinda like policemen
we got today.

"In slavery, dey traded and sold niggers like dey do hosses and mules.
Dey carry dem to de court house and put dem on de block and auction 'em
off. Some sold for roun' $3,000. It was hard to sell one wid scars on
him, 'cause nobody wanted him. I seen 'em come by in droves, all chained
together.

"When de slaves was free dey was sho' happy. Dey all got together and
had a kin' of cel'bration. Marster told dem if dey wanted to stay and
help make de crop, he'd give 'em 50 cents a day and a place to stay.
Some tuk him up on dat and stayed, but a lot of dem left dere. Me and my
brother, we started walkin' to Austin. In Austin we finds our mother,
she was working for Judge Paschal. She hires us out to one place and den
another.

"Since freedom I done most everything anybody could do. I been porter
and waiter in hotels and rest'rants. I been factory hand, and worked for
carpenters and in de roun' house. I picked cotton and worked on de farm.

"I been married 61 years. I gits married at home, like civilize folks
do. I raised a big family, 12 chillen, but only five is alive today. I
moved here in 1929 and looks like I's here till I die.
