


"Was I here in slavery days? Well, I remember when the soldiers went
to war. Oh, I'm old--I ain't no baby. But I been well taken care of--I
been treated well.

"I was bred and born right here in Arkansas and been livin' here all
the time 'cept when they said the Yankees was comin'. I know we was
just closin' up a crop. They put us in wagons and carried us to Wolf
Creek in Texas and then they carried us to Red River. That was because
it would be longer 'fore we found out we was free and they would get
more work out a us.

"Old master's name was Robert Johnson and they called him Bob.

"After freedom they brought us back to Arkansas and put the colored
folks to workin' on the shares. Yes'm they said they got their share.
They looked like they was well contented. They stayed three or four
years. We was treated more kinder and them that was not big enough to
work was let go to school. I went to school awhile and then I had a
hard spell of sickness--it was this slow fever. I was sick five or six
weeks and it was a long time 'fore I could get my health so I didn't
try to go to school no more. Seemed like I forgot everything I knowed.

"When I was fifteen I got tired of workin' so hard so I got married,
but I found out things was wusser. But my husband was good to me. Yes
ma'm, he was a good man and nice to me. He was a good worker. He was
deputy assessor under Mr. Triplett and he was a deputy sheriff and
then he was a magistrate. Oh, he was a up-to-date man. He went to
school after we was married and wanted me to go but I thought too much
of my childun. When he died, 'bout two years ago, he left me this
house and two rent houses. Yes ma'm, he was a good man.

"They ain't nothin' to this here younger generation. Did you ever see
'em goin' so fast? They won't take time to let you tell 'em anything.
They is in a hurry. The world is too fast for me, but thank the Lord
my childun is all settled. I got some nieces and nephews though that
is goin' too fast.

"Yes'm, I'm gettin' along all right. I ain't got nothin' to complain
of."
