



"I was born in Lexington, Mississippi, in the year 1872. My mother's
name was Florida Hawkins. Florida James was her slavery name. David
Jones was her old master. That was in Mississippi--the good old
country! People hate it because they don't like the name but it was a
mighty good country when I was there. The white people there were
better to the colored people when I was there than they are here. But
there is a whole lots of places that is worse than Arkansas.

"I have been here forty-eight years and I haven't had any trouble with
nobody, and I have owned three homes in my time. My nephew and my
brother happened to meet up with each other in France. They thought
about me and wrote and told me about it. And I writ to my sister in
Chicago following up their information and got in touch with my
people. Didn't find them out till the great war started. Had to go to
Europe to find my relatives. My sister's people and mine too were born
in Illinois, but my mother and two sisters and another brother were
born in Mississippi. Their kin born in Illinois were half-brothers and
so on.


Refugeeing--Ghosts

"I heard my mother say that her master and them had to refugee them to
keep them from the Yankees. She told a ghost tale on that. I guess it
must have been true.

"She said they all hitched up and put them in the wagon and went to
driving down the road. Night fell and they came to a big two-story
house. They went to bed. The house was empty, and they couldn't raise
nobody; so they just camped there for the night. After they went to
bed, big balls of fire came rolling down the stairs. They all got
scared and run out of the house and camped outside for the night.
There wasn't no more sleeping in that house.

"Some people believe in ghosts and some don't. What do you believe?
This is what I have seen myself. Mules and horses were running 'round
screaming and hollering every night. One day, I was walking along when
I saw a mule big as an elephant with ears at least three feet long and
eyes as big as auto lamps. He was standing right in the middle of the
road looking at me and making no motion to move. I was scared to
death, but I stooped down to pick up a stone. It wasn't but a second.
But when I raised up, he had vanished. He didn't make a sound. He just
disappeared in a second. That was in the broad open daylight. That was
what had been causing all the confusion with the mules and horses.

"When I first married I used to room with an old lady named Johnson.
Time we went to bed and put the light out, something would open the
doors. Finally I got scared and used to tell my wife to get up and
close the doors. Finally she got skittish about it. There used to be
the biggest storms around there and yet you couldn't see nothin'.
There wasn't no rain nor nothin'. Just sounds and noises like storms.
My wife comes to visit me sometimes now.

"My mother says there wasn't any such thing as marriage in slave
times. Old master jus' said, 'There's your husband, Florida.'"
