Susie was only four years old when The War Between the States began, but
recalls a great deal about the old days, and remembers a great deal that
her mother told her. Susie's parents were Jim and Dinah Freeman who
belonged to Mr. and Mrs. Henry Freeman.

The Freemans lived on a large plantation near The Rock, Georgia, and had
so many slaves "they could not be counted".

The old Freeman home is still standing, but is occupied now by negroes
and is in a bad state of repair.

Susie is around seventy-five or seventy-seven years old, as nearly as
she can "figger it out". A good many years ago when she first came over
here from Upson County, she found "Mr. Frank Freeman, her young marster,
away back yonder", and he told her lots and lots about her mother and
father and gave her her correct age--July 4th.

Susie says that Mr. and Mrs. Freeman were "sho" good to their slaves but
they surely did control them. For instance, if any of them had the
stomach ache "Ole Miss" would make them take some "Jerusalem Oak tea"
and if they had a bad cold it was "hoar hound tea". If you did not take
the medicine "Ole Miss" would reach up and get the leather "strop" and
(Susie chuckled) "then you'd take it".

When asked if Mr. Freeman whipped the slaves very much, Susie said he
did not and that if he had been a mean master that "all the niggers
wouldn't a wanted to stay on with him after freedom".

When asked about the negro marriage customs of slavery days, Susie
stated that her mother said that "she and Jim (Susie's daddy) when they
got in love and wanted to marry, jest held each others hands and jumped
over the broom and they was married".

"Yes, I believe in lots o' signs", Susie replied on being asked about
that. For instance, the "scritch' owl is a sho' sign o' death. And the
reason I knows that is cause my papa's death was fo' told by an owl.
Papa was took sick like this morning at nine o'clock and about eleven
o'clock a little scritch' owl come and set right on the corner of the
roof right above the head o' papa's bed and scritched and scritched--and
by two o'clock that day papa was a corpse!"

Susie remembers one day when she and her mother were picking cotton when
all of a sudden her mother began to sing "Glory to the Dying Land" and
sang so much that "atter a while she got so happy she couldn't be still
and she danced all over Masta's cotton patch and tromped down so much
cotton I jest knowed Masta was gwina whup her. Den I laffed at her so
hard 'Ole Miss whupped me wid dat strop! Law! Law!"


  Susie Johnson--232 East Tinsley Street, Griffin, Georgia
  September 4, 1936
