


"I was born in Montgomery, Alabama, within a block of the statehouse.
We were the only colored people in the neighborhood. I am eighty-three
years old. I was born free. I have never been a slave. I never met any
slaves when I was small, and never talked to any. I didn't live near
them and didn't have any contacts with them.

"My father carried my mother to Pennsylvania before I was born and set
her free. Then he carried her back to Montgomery, Alabama, and all her
children were born free there.

"We had everything that life needed. He was one of the biggest
planters around in that part of the country and did the shipping for
everybody.

"My mother's name was Josephine Hassell. She had nine children. All of
them are dead except three. One is in Washington, D. C.; another is in
Chicago, Illinois, and then I am here. One of my brothers was a mail
clerk for the government for fifty years, and then he went to
Washington and worked in the dead letter office.

"My father taken my oldest brother just before the Civil War and
entered him in Yale and he stayed there till he finished. Later he
became a freight conductor and lost his life when his train was caught
in a cyclone. That's been years ago.

"My sisters in Washington and Chicago are the only two living besides
myself. All the others are dead. All of them were government workers.
My sister in Washington has four boys and five girls. My sister in
Chicago has two children--one in Detroit and one in Washington. I am
the oldest living.

"We never had any kind of trouble with white people in slave time, and
we never had any since. Everybody in town knowed us, and they never
bothered us. The editor of the paper in Montgomery got up all our
history and sent the paper to my brother in Washington. If I had saved
the paper, I would have had it now. I don't know the name of the
paper. It was a white paper. I can't even remember the name of the
editor.

"We were always supported by my father. My mother _did_ [HW: ?] do
nothing at all except stay home and take care of her children. I had a
father that cared for us. He didn't leave that part undone. He did his
part in every respect. He sent every child away to school. He sent two
to Talladega, one to Yale, three to Fiske, and one to Howard
University.

"I don't remember much about how freedom came to the slaves. You see,
we didn't live near any of them and would not notice, and I was young
anyway. All I remember is that when the army came in, everybody had a
stick with a white handkerchief on it. The white handkerchief
represented peace. I don't know just how they announced that the
slaves were free.

"We lived in as good a house as this one here. It had eight rooms in
it. I was married sixty years ago. My husband died two years ago. We
were married fifty-eight years. Were the only colored people here to
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary. (She is mistaken in this; Waters
McIntosh has been married for fifty-six years and he and his wife are
still making it together in an ideal manner--ed.) I am the mother of
eight children; three girls are living and two boys. The rest are
dead.

"I married a good man. Guess there was never a better. We lived
happily together for a long time and he gave me everything I needed.
He gave me and my children whatever we asked for.

"I was sick for three years. Then my husband took down and was sick
for seven years before he died.

"I belong to the Holiness Church down on Izard Street, and Brother
Jeeter is my pastor."


INTERVIEWER'S COMMENT

Betty Johnson's memory is accurate, and she tells whatever she wishes
to tell without hesitation and clearly. She leaves out details which
she does not wish to mention evidently, and there is a reserve in her
manner which makes questioning beyond a certain point impertinent.
However, just what she tells presents a picture into which the details
may easily be fitted.

Her husband is dead, but he was evidently of the same type she is. She
lives in a beautiful and well kept cottage. Her husband left a similar
house for each of her three children. The husband, of course, was
colored. It is equally evident that the father was white.

Although my questions traveled into corners where they evidently did
not wish to follow, the mother and son, who was from time to time with
her, answered courteously and showed no irritation.
