"Dar's golden streets and a pearly gate somewhars,
     Dar's golden streets and a pearly gate somewhars,
       I gwian ter keep on searchin' till I finds hit,
     Dar's golden streets and a pearly gate somewhars.

    "Dar's perfect peace somewhars,
     Dar's perfect peace somewhars,
       I gwian ter keep on searchin' till I finds hit,
     Dar's perfect peace somewhars.

"Good mornin', Missie! Glad to see you again. I is workin' on chairs
again. Got these five to bottom for Mr. Brown and I sho can talk while
I does this work.

"Ain't the sunshine pretty this mornin'? I prayed last night that the
Lord would let today be sunny. I 'clare, Missie, hits rained so much
lately till I bout decided me and all my things was goin' to mildew.
Yes'm, me and all-l-l my things. And I done told you I likes to set on
my gallery to work. I likes to watch the folks go by. It seems so
natchel like to set here and howdy with em.

"I been in this old world a long time, but just can recollect bein' a
slave. Since Christmas ain't long past it sets me to thinkin' bout the
last time old Sandy Claus come to see us. He brought us each one a
stick of candy, a apple and a orange, and he never did come to see us
no more after that time cause we peeped. That was the last time he
ever filt our stockin'. But you knows how chaps is. We just had to
peep.

"You knows I was born and raised in Louisiana. I done told you that
many times. And I just wish you could see the vituals on old marster's
table at Christmas time. Lawdy, but his table jes groaned with good
things. Old Mistress had the cook cookin' for weeks before time it
seemed to me. There was hams and turkeys and chickens and cakes of all
kinds. They sho was plenty to eat. And they was a present for all the
niggers on the place besides the heaps of pretty things that Marster's
family got off the tree in the parlor.

"When I first began to work on the farm old master put me to cuttin'
sprouts, then when I got big enough to make a field hand, I went to
the field then. I done lots of kinds of work--worked in the field,
split rails, built fences, cleared new ground and just anything old
marster wanted me to do. I members one time I got a long old splinter
in my foot and couldn't get it out, so my mammy bound a piece of fat
meat round my foot and let it stay bout a couple days, then the
splinter come out real easy like. And I was always cutting myself too
when I was a chap. You know how careless chaps is. An soot was our
main standby for cuts. It would close the gash and heal it. And soot
and sugar is extra good to stop bleeding. Sometime, if I would be in
the field too far away from the house or anyplace where we could get
soot, we would get cobwebbs from the cotton house and different places
to stop the bleeding. One time we wasn't close to neither and one the
men scraped some felt off from a old black hat and put it on to stop
the bleedin'.

"My feets was tough. Didn't wear shoes much till I was grown. Went
barefooted. My feets was so tough I could step on stickers and not
feel em. Just to show how tough I was I used to take a blackberry limb
and take my toes and skin the briers off and it wouldn't hurt my
feets.

"Did I ever tell you bout my first pair of breeches? I was bout twelve
then and before that I went in my shirt tail. I thought I was goin' to
be so proud of my first breeches but I didn't like them. They was too
tight and didn't have no pockets. They come just below my knees and I
felt so uncomfortable-like that I tore em off me. And did I get a
lickin? I got such a lickin' that when my next ones was made I was
glad to put em on and wear em.

"I stayed round with marster's boys a lot, and them white boys was as
good to me as if I had been their brother. And I stayed up to the big
house lots of nights so as to be handy for runnin' for old master and
mistress. The big house was fine but the log cabin where my mammy
lived had so many cracks in it that when I would sleep down there I
could lie in bed and count the stars through the cracks. Mammy's beds
was ticks stuffed with dried grass and put on bunks built on the wall,
but they did sleep so good. I can most smell that clean dry grass now.
Mammy made her brooms from broom sage, and she cooked on a fireplace.
They used a oven and a fireplace up at the big house too. I never saw
no cookstove till I was grown.

"I members one time when I was a little shaver I et too many green
apples. And did I have the bellie ache, whoo-ee! And mammy poured cold
water over hot ashes and let it cool and made me drink it and it sure
cured me too. I members seein' her make holly bush tea, and parched
corn tea too for sickness. Nother time I had the toothache and mammy
put some axle grease in the hollow of the tooth and let it stay there.
The pain stopped and the tooth rotted out and we didn't have to pull
it.

"Whee! Did you see how that car whizzed round the corner? There warn't
no cars in my young days. They had mostly two-wheeled carts with
shafts for the horse to be hitched in, and lots of us drove oxen to
them carts. I plowed oxen many-a-day and rode em to and from the
field. Let me tell you, Missy, if you don't know nothin' bout
oxen--they surely does sull on you--you beat them and the more you
beat the more they sulls. Yes'm, they sure sulls in hot weather, but
it never gets too cold for em.

"Howdy, Parson. That sho was good preachin' Sunday. Yes suh, it was
fine.

"That's the pastor of our church, an he sho preached two good sermons
last Sunday. Sunday mornin' he preached 'Every kind of fish is caught
in a net' and that night he preached 'Marvel not you must be born
again.' But that mornin' sermon, it capped the climax. Parson sho told
em bout it. He say, 'First, they catch the crawfish, and that fish
ain't worth much; anybody that gets back from duty or one which says I
will and then won't is a crawfish Christian.' Then he say, 'The next
is a mudcat; this kind of a fish likes dark trashy places. When you
catch em you won't do it in front water; it likes back water and wants
to stay in mud. That's the way with some people in church. You can't
never get them to the front for nothin'. You has to fish deep for
them. The next one is the jellyfish. It ain't got no backbone to face
the right thing. That the trouble with our churches today. Too many
jellyfishes in em.' Next, he say is the gold fish--good for nothin'
but to look at. They is pretty. That the way folks is. Some of them go
to church just to sit up and look pretty to everybody. Too pretty to
sing; too pretty to say Amen! That what the parson preached Sunday.
Well, I'm a full-grown man and a full-grown Christian, praise the
Lord. Yes,'m, parson is a real preacher."


VOODOO MAN
UNCLE MARION JOHNSON, EX-SLAVE.
[Date Stamp: OCT 26 1936]


"Yes young missey ah'll sho tell yo-all whut yo wants ter know. Yes'm
ole Uncle Marion sho kin. Mah price is fo' bits fer one question.
No'm, not fo' bits fo th' two uv yo but fo' bits each. Yo say yo all
ain't got much money and yo all both wants ter know th' same thing.
Well ah reckon since yo all is been comin' roun' and tawkin' to ole
Uncle Marion ah cud make hit answer th' one question fuh both uv yo
fuh fo' bits 'tween yo. No'm ah caint bring hit out heah. Yo all will
haft tuh come inside th' house."

"[TR: " should be (]We went inside the house and Uncle Marion
unwrapped his voodoo instrument which proved to be a small glass
bottle about 2-1/2 inches tall wrapped to the neck in pink washable
adhesive tape and suspended from a dirty twine about six inches long.
At the top of the twine was a slip knot and in a sly way Uncle Marion
would twist the cord before asking the question. If the cord was
twisted in one direction the bottle would swing in a certain direction
and if the cord was twisted in the other direction the bottle would
swing in the opposite direction. Uncle Marion thought that we did not
observe this and of course we played dumb. By twisting the cord and
slyly working the muscles of his arm Uncle Marion made his instrument
answer his questions in the way that he wished them answered.)

"Now ifn the answer to huh question is yais swing towards huh and ifn
taint be still. (The bottle slowly swung toward me.) Now missy see hit
have done answered yo question and yo done seed hit say yes. Yes'm hit
sho am yes and yo' jes wait and see ifn ole Uncle Marion aint right.
Now yo jes answer the same question fuh tother young missy heah. Now
ifn the answer is yais yo turn toward huh which am the opposite to
which yo jes turnt and ifn the answer is no sta' still. (The bottle
then slowly turned around and went in Mrs. Thompson's direction.)

"Yo say whut do ah call dis heah? Ah calls hit a "jack". Yas'm hits a
jack an' hit sho will answer any question yo wants ter ask hit. No'm
yo cuden ask hit yo-self. Ah would haft ter ask hit fer yo. An' let me
tell yo' ole Uncle Marion sho kin help youall chillun. Ah kin help yo
all ward off evil and jinx; ah kin help yo all git a job; ah kin help
yo all ovah come the ruination uv yo home. Uncle Marion sho cain give
yo a helpin good luck hand. Ah cain help yo ovah come yo enemies.

"Now since ah knows yo young misses am in'erested an ah knows yo will
sen' othah fokes tuh me what am in trouble ah am gointer tell yo all
whut some uv mah magic remidies is so yo all kin tell fokes that ah
have them yarbs (herbs) fuh sale. Yes'm ah has them yarbs right hea
fuh sale and hit sho will work too.

"Now thar is High John the Conquerer Root. If'n yo totes one o' them
roots in yo pocket yo will nevah be widout money. No mam. And you'll
always conquer yo troubles an yo enemies. An fokes can sho git them
yarbs thru me. Efn Uncle Marion don' have non on han' he sho kin git
em for em.

"Den dar is five finger grass, ah kin git dat fuh yo too. Ifn dat is
hung up ovah th' bedstid hit brings restful sleep and keeps off evil.
Each one uv dem five fingahs stans for sumpin too. One stans fuh good
luck, two fuh money, thee fuh wisdom, fo' fuh power an five fuh love.

"Yas'm an ah kin buil' a unseen wall aroun' yo so as ter keep evil,
jinx and enemies way fum yo and hit'll bring heaps uv good luck too.
The way ah does hit is this way: Ah takes High John the Conqueror Root
and fixes apiece of red flannel so as ter make a sack and puts hit in
the sack along wid magnetic loadstone, five finger grass, van van oil,
controllin' powdah and drawin powdah and the seal uv powah. This heah
mus be worn aroun the neck and sprinkle hit ever mornin fuh seven
mornins wid three drops uv holy oil. Then theah is lucky han' root.
Hit looks jes like a human han'. If yo carries hit on yo person hit
will shake yo jinx and make yo a winnah in all kinds o games and
hit'll help yo choose winnin numbers."
