LIZA JONES, 81, was born a slave of Charley Bryant, near Liberty,
     Texas. She lives in Beaumont, and her little homestead is reached
     by a devious path through a cemetery and across a ravine on a plank
     foot-bridge. Liza sat in a backless chair, smoking a pipe, and her
     elderly son lay on a blanket nearby. Both were resting after a hot
     day's work in the field. Within the open door could be seen Henry
     Jones, Liza's husband for sixty years, a tall, gaunt Negro who is
     helpless. Blind, deaf and almost speechless, he could tell nothing
     of slavery days, although he was grown when the war ended.


"When de Yankees come to see iffen dey had done turn us a-loose, I am a
nine year old nigger gal. That make me about 81 now. Dey promenade up to
de gate and de drum say a-dr-um-m-m-m-m, and de man in de blue uniform
he git down to open de gate. Old massa he see dem comin' and he runned
in de house and grab up de gun. When he come hustlin' down off de
gallery, my daddy come runnin'. He seed old massa too mad to know what
he a-doin', so quicker dan a chicken could fly he grab dat gun and
wrastle it outten old massa's hands. Den he push old massa in de
smokehouse and lock de door. He ain't do dat to be mean, but he want to
keep old massa outten trouble. Old massa know dat, but he beat on de
door and yell, but it ain't git open till dem Yankees done gone.

"I wisht old massa been a-livin' now, I'd git a piece of bread and meat
when I want it. Old man Charley Bryant, he de massa, and Felide Bryant
de missus. Dey both have a good age when freedom come.

"My daddy he George Price and he boss nigger on de place. Dey all come
from Louisiana, somewhere round New Orleans and all dem li'l extra
places.

"Liz'beth she my mama and dey's jus' two us chillen, me and my brudder,
John. He lives in Beaumont.

"'Bout all de work I did was 'tend to de rooms and sweep. Nobody ever
'low us to see nobody 'bused. I never seed or heared of nobody gittin'
cut to pieces with a whip like some. Course, chillen wasn't 'lowed to go
everywhere and see everything like dey does now. Dey jump in every
corner now.

"Miss Flora and Miss Molly am de only ones of my white folks what am
alive now and dey done say dey take me to San Antonio with dem. Course,
I couldn't go now and leave Henry, noway. De old Bryant place am in de
lawsuit. Dey say de brudder, Mister Benny, he done sharped it 'way from
de others befo' he die, but I 'lieve the gals will win dat lawsuit.

"My daddy am de gold pilot on de old place. Dat mean anything he done
was right and proper. Way after freedom, when my daddy die in Beaumont,
Cade Bryant and Mister Benny both want to see him befo' he buried. Dey
ride in and say, 'Better not you bury him befo' us see him. Dat's us
young George.' Dey allus call daddy dat, but he old den.

"My mama was de spring back cook and turkey baker. Dey call her dat, she
so neat, and cook so nice. I's de expert cook, too. She larnt me.

"Us chillen used to sing

  "'Don't steal,
  Don't steal my sugar.
  Don't steal,
  Don't steal my candy.
  I's comin' round de mountain.'

"Dey sho' have better church in dem days dan now. Us git happy and
shout. Dey too many blind taggers now. Now dey say dey got de key and
dey ain't got nothin'. Us used to sing like dis:

  "'Adam's fallen race,
  Good Lawd, hang down my head and cry.
  Help me to trust him,
  Help me to trust him,
  Help me to trust him,
     Gift of Gawd.

  "'Help me to trust him,
  Help me to trust him,
  Help me to trust him,
     Eternal Life.

  "'Had not been for Adam's race,
  I wouldn't been sinnin' today,
  Help me to trust him,
     Gift of Gawd.'

"Dey 'nother hymn like dis:

  "'Heavenly land,
  Heavenly land,
  I's gwineter beg Gawd,
  For dat Heavenly land.

  "'Some come cripplin',
  Some come lame,
  Some come walkin',
  In Jesus' name.'

"You know I saw you-all last night in my sleep? I ain't never seed you
befo' today, but I seed you last night. Dey's two of you, a man and a
woman, and you come crost dat bridge and up here, askin' me iffen I
trust in de Lawd. And here you is today.

"Dey had nice parties in slavery time and right afterwards. Dey have
candy pullin' and corn shuckin's and de like. Old Massa Day and Massa
Bryant, dey used to put dey niggers together and have de prize dances.
Massa Day allus lose, 'cause us allus beat he niggers at dancin'. Lawd,
when I clean myself up, I sho' could teach dem how to buy a cake-walk in
dem days. I could cut de pigeon wing, jes' pull my heels up and clack
dem together. Den us do de back step and de banquet, too.

"Us allus have de white tarleton Swiss dress for dances and Sunday. Dem
purty good clothes, too and dey make at home. Us knowed how to sew and
one de old man's gals, she try teach me readin' and writin'. I didn't
have no sense, though, and I cry to go out and play.

"When freedom come old massa he done broke down and cry, so my daddy
stay with him. He stay a good many year, till both us chillen was
growed. Us have de li'l log house on de place all dat time. Dey 'nother
old cullud man what stay, name George Whitehouse. He have de li'l house,
too. He stay till he die.

"Dey was tryin' to make a go of it after de war, 'cause times was hard.
De white boys, dey go out in de field and work den, and work hard,
'cause dey don't have de slaves no more. I used to see de purty, young
white ladies, all dress up, comin' to de front door. I slips out and
tell de white boys, and dey workin' in de field, half-naked and dirty,
and dey sneak in de back door and clean up to spark dem gals.

"I been marry to dat Henry in dere sixty year, and he was a slave in
Little Rock, in Arkansas, for Anderson Jones. Henry knowed de bad,
tejous part of de war and he must be 'bout 96 year old. Now he am in
pain all de time. Can't see, can't hear and can't talk. Us never has had
de squabble. At de weddin' de white folks brung cakes and every li'l
thing. I had a white tarleton dress with de white tarleton wig. Dat de
hat part what go over de head and drape on de shoulder. Dat de sign you
ain't never done no wrong sin and gwinter keep bein' good.

"After us marry I move off de old place, but nothin' must do but I got
to keep de house for Mister Benny. I's cleanin' up one time and finds a
milk churn of money. I say, 'Mr. Benny, what for you ain't put dat money
in de bank?' He say he will. De next time I cleanin' up I finds a pillow
sack full of money. I says, 'Mr. Benny, I's gwineter quit. I ain't
gwineter be 'sponsible for dis money.' He's sick den and I put de money
under he pillow and git ready to go. He say, 'You better stay, or I send
Andrew, de sheriff, after you.' I goes and cooks dinner and when I gits
back dey has four doctors with Mr. Benny. He wife say to me, 'Liza, you
got de sight. Am Benny gwineter git well?' I goes and looks and I knowed
he gwine way from dere. I knowed he was gone den. Dey leant on me a heap
after dat.

"It some years after dat I leaves dem and Henry and me gits married and
us make de livin' farmin'. Us allus stays right round hereabouts and
gits dis li'l house. Now my son and me, us work de field and gits 'nough
to git through on.
