


"I come here in 1856--you can figure it out for yourself. I was born
in Arkansas, fifty miles below here.

"I remember the soldiers. I know I was a little boy drivin' the gin.
Had to put me upon the lever. You see, all us little fellows had to
work.

"I remember seein' the Indians goin' by to fight at Arkansas Post.
They fought on the southern side. When I heard the cannons, I asked my
mama what it was and she said 'twas war.

"John Dye--that was my young master--went to the War but Ruben had a
kind of afflicted hand and he didn't go.

"Our plantation was on the river and I used to see the Yankee boats go
down the river.

"My papa belonged to the Douglases and mama belonged to the Dyes. I
was born on the Douglas place and I ain't been down there in over
fifty years. They said I was born in March but I don't know any more
bout it than a rabbit.

"Papa said he was raised up in the house. Said he didn't do much
work--just tended to the gin.

"I remember one night the Ku Klux come to our house. I was so scared I
run under the house and stayed till ma called me out. I was so scared
I didn't know what they had on.

"I remember when some of the folks come back from Texas and they said
peace was declared.

"I think my brother run off and jined the Yankees and come here when
they took Pine Bluff. War is a bad thing. I think they goin' keep on
till they hatch up another one.

"I didn't go to school much. I was the oldest boy at home and I had to
plow. I went seven days all told and since then I learned ketch as
ketch can. I can read and write pretty well. It's a consolation to be
able to read. If you can't get all of it, you can get some of it.

"Been here in Jefferson County ever since 1867. I come here from
Lincoln County.

"After freedom my papa moved my mama down on the Douglas place where
he was and stayed one year, then moved on the Simpson place in Lincoln
County, and then come up here in Jefferson County. I remember all the
moves.

"I remember down here where Kientz Bros, place is was the gallows
where they hung folks in slavery times. You know--when they had
committed some crime.

"Yes'm, I voted but I never held any office.

"I know I don't look my age but I can tell you a heap of things
happened before emancipation.

"I think the people are better off free--they got liberty."
