_AUNT HANNAH HAS A HUNDRED DESCENDANTS_

Aunt Hannah Jones lives with her daughter in a small four room house on
Tuscaloosa Street, Greensboro. "Lawdy," she said, "It’s been so long dat
I’s ’mos’ forgot ’bout dem slavery days, but I was bawn, in Bunker Hill,
Amelia County, Virginny. My pappy was named Simon Johnson an’ my mammy
was Rhoda Johnson. My Marster was Alfred Wood an’ my mistis was Miss
Tabby Wood. When Massa died, de ’state was ’vided an’ I fell to de son
dat was too sick to take care of de place an’ de slaves. Soon I was tuk
to Richmond an’ sold to Jedge Moore of Alabammy for twelve hundred
dollars. Dat was de fust time I ever seed a slave sold. I was sixteen
years old. When Jedge Moore’s plantation was sold de niggers went wid de
place an’ it was bought by Marse Isaiah an’ Marse Bill Smarr. It was
called de Gillum Place and dat is east of Prairieville. I was a house
girl an’ ho’p wid de sewin’ an’ de spinnin’.

"Us had good houses built outten cedar logs an’ de quarters looked jus’
lak dis street dat I lives on now. We had good beds an’ plenty vittels
to eat: greens, cawn bread, meat an’ all kinds of sweets. Some time de
men folks would ketch a ’possum or rabbit. Marster had a big vegetable
garden an’ we was ’lowed to help ourselves f’um dis here garden. Us had
two eve’y day dresses, an’ we done our washin’ at night. When I was
ma’ied, de ceremony tuk place at my Mammy’s house an’ I wo’ a pretty
white dress.

"Our oberseer was Harvey Williamson an’ he went ’roun’ at nine o’clock
to see iffen us niggers was in baid. Sometimes atter he done been
'roun’, us’d git up an’ have some fun. At de break of day all de slaves
would git up an’ go to work. Dose goin’ way down in de fiel’s would have
to git up even befo’ it was light so’s to be dar when de dawn broke to
commence de day’s work. Den dey would come back at twelve o’clock for
dinner an’ res’ awhile, den go back an’ work till sun down.

"We useta have a man on de place dat played a banjo, an’ we would dance
an’ play while he sang.

"Dis was one of his songs:

    White folks says a nigger won’t steal
    But I cotched six in my cawnfiel’
    If you want to see a nigger run
    Shoot at dat nigger wid a gattlin’ gun.

"My last Marsters was two brothers an’ dey had one sister, Miss Sarah
Smarr.

"We didn’t have no jail on de place, an’ most of us never went offen de
plantation, jus’ stayed ’roun’ an’ had a good time playin’ amongst
ourselves. Us niggers had a church dar on de place an’ a white man
preached to us, but in Virginny we went to de same church as de Marster
did. I didn’t jine no church dough till I come to Alabamy.

"None of us slaves ever tried to run away to de nawth ’ca’se dey was
good to us.

"We useta have a doctor dat’d come roun’ eve’y two weeks to see how de
slaves was doin’ an’ iffen we was sick he would give us some medicine.
Some of de women would tie asafetida ’roun’ de chilluns necks to keep de
sickness away.

"Some Saddays we had to work after dinner, but most of the time Marster
would let us have a good time. On Christmas day us had a big celebration
an’ didn’t do no work at all.

"Didn’t nobody have no time to learn us how to read an’ write.

"I don’t know nothin’ ’bout Mr. Lincoln ’cep’n he freed all us slaves,
an’ when we heard dat us was free all de niggers marched to Prairieville
an’ had a celebration.

"Honey, I’s had nine chilluns, twenty five gran’ chilluns, twenty seven
great gran’ chilluns an’ thirteen great great gran’chilluns, an’ I is
expectin’ mo’ to come along pretty soon. I guess maybee I’ll have 100
descendents fo’ I shuffle off."


