


"I been here ever since 1853--yes ma'm! Cose I 'member the war! I tell
you I've seen them cannon balls goin' up just like a balloon. I wasn't
big enough to work till peace was declared but they had my mammy and
daddy under the lash. One good thing 'bout my white folks, they give
the hands three months' schoolin' every year. My mammy and daddy got
three months' schoolin' in the old country. Some said that was General
Washington's proclamation, but some of 'em wouldn't hear to it. When
peace was declared, some of the niggers had as good education as the
white man. That was cause their owners had 'lowed it to 'em.

"They used to put us in cells under the house so the Yankees couldn't
get us. Old master's name was Sam Kirk and he had overseers and nigger
dogs (bloodhounds) that didn't do nothin' but run them niggers.

"I 'member one time when they say the Yankees was comin' all us
chillun, boys and girls, white and black, got upon the fence and old
master come out and say 'Get in your holes!'

"The war went on four years. Them was turrible times. I don't never
want to see no more war. Them that had plenty, time the regiment went
by they didn't have nothin'. Old mistress had lots a turkeys and hogs
and the Yankees just cleaned 'em out. Didn't have time to pick
'em--just skinned 'em. They had a big camp 'bout as long as from here
to town.

"They burned up the big house as flat as this floor. They wasn't
nothin' left but the chimneys. Oh the Yankees burned up plenty. They
burned Raleigh and they burned Atlanta--that was the southern capital.
I've seen the Yankees go right out in people's fields and make 'em
take the horses out. Then they'd saddle 'em and ride right off.

"General Grant had ten thousand nigger soldiers outside of the
Irishmen and the Dutchmen. I know General Grant looked fearful when he
come by. After surrender he had a corps pass through and notify the
people that the war was over.

"Abraham Lincoln was a war captain. He was a man that believed in
right. He was seven feet four inches high.

"I was born in North Carolina and I come here in 'sixty seven. I
worked too!"
