

"My mastuh’s name was Peter Burns and we lived out in Cape County, close
to the Houck place. My daddy’s name was Charles Lee. Mammy’s name was
'Lizabeth, and old mastuh bought her from de Catholic priests. Old
mastuh had a big white frame house and it had lots of trees ’round it.
There was a saw-mill jes’ across de road.

"I was just a little feller during de war, but I can remember dat when
de Rebel sojers come by our place old mastuh had de table set for ’em,
and treat ’em fine—’cause he’s a rebel—den when de ’Yankees’ come along
he give dem de bes’ he had, and treat ’em fine ’cause he’s a 'Yankee’.
Old Jedge Ranney live on de next place and he and old mastuh was good
friends—but he was such a hot southerner he couldn’t stand old mastuh to
act like dat. In a way I guess old mastuh was right for none of de
sojers never bother nuthin’ on de place.

"One time de blue-coats was coming by de jedge’s place. De jedge had
lots of turkeys and dey was roosting up in de trees. I don’t think de
sojers was bothering nuthin’, but something must’ve skeered dem turkeys
for dey commenced making a awful racket. Den de jedge, he come out, ask
what dey doing to his turkeys—and he raise a big fuss. So den de sojers
druv’ into de barn—dey was a great big barn with a drive through de
middle. Dey jes’ drove in de wagons, loaded ’em with corn and hay—and
dey caught some chickens and dey take all de jedge’s best hosses. De
jedge jes’ stand there and watch ’em. He can’t do nuthing ’cause de more
he say de more dey takes. But dey never bother old mastuh’s place
none—’cause he make friends with both sides.

"One time de Rebel sojers was there. Old mastuh had de table all set
with everything fine to eat. And de Rebels was jes’ getting ready to eat
when we hear de big guns from de forts, at de Cape, and word come dat de
Yanks was coming. I can jes’ see dem Rebel sojers yet—how dey rolled out
of there. Most of ’em was a-wearin’ coonskin caps with de tail a-hangin’
down. And how dey did go! Dat was de time Mahmaduke was a-tryin’ to take
de Cape. I hear de Yanks overtook him about Allenville and had a
skirmish there.

"No’m I don’t much believe in ghosts and de like—and yet one time out
there by Benton Hill—you know dey always say Benton Hill’s ha’nted—well
I was comin’ along there one evening ’bout dark—and from across de road
come two men—dey was dressed in kind of white suits and had big, floppy
hats on. Dey didn’t say nothing and cross de road, right in front of
me—with dey heads hanging down. When I gets a little past 'em I
thinks—wonder where dey’s going? So I looks back and sees ’em start up
dat hill and then jest plum disappear. I studies ’bout that, and next
morning when I goes back, I goes to look and see where de tracks go. De
clay on dat hillside were so soft if you’d put your hand down it would
leave a track, but dey warn’t a sign of a track whar I seed dem men walk
up dar and disappear. After dat I always carry me a lantern when I goes
by dar, at night, and when folks tells me ’bout spirits dey seen I don’t
never tell ’em I don’t believe ’em."
