Henry Lewis was born in 1835, at Pine Island, in Jefferson Co., Texas.
He was owned by Bob Cade. Henry’s voice is low and somewhat indistinct
and it was evidently a strain on his vocal chords and also on his
memory, to tell the story of his life. He lives with one of his
daughters, in Beaumont, who supports him, with the aid of his pension.*

"Old Bob Cade, he my massa, and Annie Cade, she my missus. Dey had a big
plantation over in Louisiana and ’nother in Jefferson County, out at
Pine Island. I’s born a hunnerd and one year ago, on Christmas Day, out
at Pine Island. If I lives to see next Christmas day ’gain, I’ll be a
hunerd two year old.

"My mammy she come from Mis’sippi and she name’ Judy Lewis. Washington
Lewis, one de slaves on Massa Bob’s Louisiana plantation, he my daddy. I
can’t ’member nobody else ’cept my greatgramma, Patsy. She’s 130 when
she die. She look awful, but den she my folks. My own dear mammy was 112
year old when she die. She have ten chillen and de bigges’ portion dem
born in slavery time. Dey two sister older’n me, Mandy and Louise. I
name’ after my daddy brudder, Henry Lewis.

"My white folks have a plantation in Louisiana, at Caginly, and stay
over dere mos’ de time. I ’member when old Massa Bob used to come to
Pine Island to stay a month or two, all us li’l chillen gather round him
and he used to throw out two bitses and big one cent pieces ’mongst us,
jis’ to see us scrammel for dem. When Christmas time come round dey give
us Christmas gift and a whole week for holiday.

"I never been no nearer east dan Lake Charles and dat been lately, so I
ain’t never see de old plantation. At Pine Island us have de big woods
place with a hunerd workin’ hands, without de underlin’s (children). All
he niggers say Cade de good man. He hire he overseers and say, ’You can
correct dem for dey own good and make dem work right, but you ain’t
better cut dey hide or draw no blood.’ He git a-holt some mean overseers
but dey don’t tarry long. He find out dey beatin’ he niggers and den he
beat dem and say, ’How dat suit you?’

"Old massa he a big, stocky Irishman with sandy hair and he ain’t had no
beard or mustache. When he grow old he have de gout and he put de long
mattress out on de gallery and lay down on it. He say, ’Come here, my
li’l niggers,’ and den he make us rub he foots so he kin git to sleep.

"Dey used to have old slavery-day jedge and jury of white folks and dey
hear de case and ’cide how many lashes to give de darky. Dey put de lash
on dem, but dey never put no jail on dem. I seed some slaves in chains
and I heared of one massa what had de place in de fence with de hole cut
out for de nigger’s neck. Dey hist up de board and de nigger put he head
through de hole and den dey beat him with a lash with holes bored in it
and every hole raise de blister. Den he bus’ dem blisters with de
handsaw and dey put salt and pepper in de bucket water and ’noint dem
blisters with de mop dip in de water. Dey do dat when dey in ’ticular
bad humor, iffen de nigger ain’t chop ’nough cotton or corn. Sometime a
overseer kilt a nigger, and dey don’t do nothin’ to him ’cept make him
pay for de nigger. But our massa good.

"Old massa ’low us praise Gawd but lots of massas didn’t ’low dem to git
on de knees. Us have church-house and de white folks go in de mornin’
and us go after dinner. Us used to sing:

    "’My knee bones achin’,
    My body’s rackin’ with pain,
    I calls myself de chile of Gawd,
    Heaven am my aim.
    If you don’t ’lieve I’s a chile of Gawd,
    Jis’ meet me on dat other shore,
    Heaven is my home.
    I calls myself a chile of Gawd,
    I’s a long time on my way,
    But Heaven am my home.’

"Old massa have de house make out hand-sawed planks in slavery time. It
put together with home-made nails, dem spike, square nails dey make
deyselfs. It have de long gallery on it. De slaves have li’l log cabin
house with mud-cat chimney on de side and de furn’ture mostly Georgia
hosses for beds and mattress make out tow sacks. Dey no floor in dem
house, ’cept what Gawd put in dem.

"When I six or seven year old dey ’cides I’s big ’nough to start ridin’
hosses. Dey have de big cattle ranch and I ride all over dis territory.
I’s too li’l to git on de hoss and dey lift me up, and dey have de real
saddle for me, too. I couldn’t git up, but I sho’ could stay up when I
git dere, I’s jis’ like a hoss-fly.

"Beaumont was jis’ a briarpatch in dem time. Jis’ one li’l store and one
blacksmith shop, and Massa John Herring he own dat. Dat de way I first
see my wife, ridin’ de range. De Cade brand was a lazy RC [TR: letters R
and C turned 90 degrees] dat done register ’fore I’s born. Us brand from
de first of March to de 15th of December.

"Old massa have de big field ’vided in trac’s and each slave could have
a part and raise what he want, and old massa buy de crop from de slave.
He’s purty good to he slaves, and us have good clothes, too, wool for
winter and cotton for summer. Us have six suit de year, unnerwear and
all. Dey a trunk like in de cabin for Sunday clothes and de res’ hang on
a peg.

"Us have plenty good food to eat, too. Beef and hawgs and bacon and
syrup and sugar and flour was plenty. All de possums and rabbits and
fish and sich was jis’ dat much more. He give us de barrel whiskey every
year, too.

"Dey ’low de li’l chillen lots of playtime and no hard task. Us play
stick hoss and seven-up marble game with marbles us make and de ’well
game.’ De gal or boy sot in de chair and lean way back and ’tend like
dey in de well. Dey say dey so many feet down and say, ’Who you want
pull you out?’ And de one you want pull you out, dey sposed to kiss you.

"Dey used to be nigger traders what come through de country with de herd
of niggers, jis’ like cattlemen with de herd of cattle. Dey fix camp and
de pen on de ridge of town and people what want to buy more slaves go
dere. Dey have a block and make de slaves git up on dat. Maybe one man
say, ’I give you, $200.00,’ and when dey’s through de slave sold to de
highes’ bidder. Old massa warn us look out and not let de trader cotch
us, ’cause a trader jis’ soon steal a nigger and sell him.

"De patterrollers come round befo’ de war to see iffen de massas treat
dere slaves good. My wife’s gramma say dey come round to her massa’s
place, but befo’ dey git dere he take a meat skin and make dem rub it
round dey mouth and git dey face all greasy so it look like dey have
plenty to eat and he tell dem dey better tell de patterrollers dey
gittin’ plenty to eat. But dere one big nigger and he say, ’Hell, no, he
ain’t give us ’nough to eat.’ Den dat nigger say, ’Please take me with
you, ’cause if you don’t massa gwineter kill me when you git gone.’

"Old massa he die befo’ de war and den he son, John Cade, take over de
place, and he brudders help. Dey name’ Overton and Taylor and Bob,
Junior. Us all want to git free and talk ’bout it in de quarters ’mongst
ourselfs, but we ain’t say nothin’ where de white folks heared us.

"When war come on I seed sojers every day. Dey have de camp in Liberty
and I watches dem. I heared de guns, too, maybe at Sabine Pass, but I
didn’t see no actual fightin’. Dat a long year to wait, de las’ year de
war. Dey sont de papers down on March 5th, I done heared, but dey didn’t
turn us loose den. Dis de last state to turn de slaves free. When dey
didn’t let dem go in March, de Yankee sojers come in June and make dem
let us go. Next mornin’ after de sojers come, de overseer reads de
papers out and say we’s free as he is and we can go. Some stay on de old
place a long time and some go off. You know dey jis’ slaves and wasn’t
civilize’. Some ain’t never git civilize’ jet. Old massa never give us
nothin’, but he told us we would stay on iffen we want, but I left.

"I goes down close to Anahuac and builds a li’l log cabin at Monroe
City, and dat’s where dey puttin’ in oil wells now. Washington Lewis,
dat my daddy, he have 129 acres dere. De white folks say to sign de
paper to let dem put de well on it and dey give us $50.00 and us sign
dat paper and dey have de land.

"I marries in slavery time, when I’s ’bout 22 year old. My first wife
name’ Rachel an she live on Double Bayou. She belong to de Mayes place.
I see her when I ridin’ de range for Massa Bob. I tells massa I wants to
git marry and he make ma ask Massa Mayes and us have de big weddin’. She
dress all in white. I have de nice hat and suit of black clothes and
daddy a shoemaker and make me de good pair of shoes to git marry in. Us
stand front Massa Mayes and he read out de Bible. Us had a real big
supper and some de white folks give us money.

"De first money I makes am workin’ for de gov’ment in Galveston. After
de war de gov’ment hire folks to clean up de trash what de fightin’ make
and I am hired. Dey lots of wood and stones and brick and trees and sich
dem big guns knock down.

"I goes back to ridin’ de prairie and rides till I’s 94 year old. I
stops de same year Mr. Joe Hebert dies. When I quits I’s out workin’,
tendin’ Mr. Langham’s chickens and I forgits it Christmas and my
birthday till Mr. Langham comes ridin’ out with my money. Dat’s de last
work I done and dat in 1931 and I’s 94 year old, like I say. I bet dese
nineteen hunerd niggers ain’t gwine live dat long.

"I didn’t had no chillen by my first wife and she been dead ’bout 70
year now. My last wife name’ Charlotte and she been dead 22 year and us
have 16 chillen. Dey six gals and ten boys and ten am livin’ now. Mos’
of dem am too old to work now. I stays with Ada, here, and she got a
gif’. She know what kind of herb am good for medicine for diff’rent
ailments. She born with a veil over de face and am wise to dem things.
Dey’s de fever weed and de debil’s shoestring, and fleaweed cures
neuralgy and toothache. Spanish mulberry root, dat good for kidneys.
When anybody git swolled feets give dem wild grapevine. Prickly ash bark
good for dat, too. Red oak bark good for women’s troubles and pumpkin
head for de heart. Camphor and asafoetida in de bag round de neck good
for de heart. When de chile git convulsion make dem drink li’l bluin’.
Dat good for growed-up folks, too. It good for burns, too."
