Amos Lincoln, 85, was born a slave of Elshay Guidry, whose plantation
was in the lower delta country of Louisiana, about fifty miles south of
New Orleans. His memories of slave days are somewhat vague. He has lived
in Beaumont fifty-two years.*

"My tongue’s right smart I think. I’s ten year old when they blew up
that fort. I mean Fort Jackson. Grandpa was cookin’. They wouldn’t let
him fight. The fort was in New Orleans. They kilt lots of people. They
bore holes in the ground and blow it up. A square hole, you know, a
machine went in there. A man could crawl in the hole, yes, yes, sho’.
The fort was long side the river. They bore holes from the river bank.
They had a white paper, a order for ’em not to come to New Orleans. They
drag cannon in the hole and shoot up the fort.

"Soon’s freedom come my pa and ma was squatters on gov’ment land. It was
good land and high land. My pa had ’bout 100 acres. One night somebody
come shoot him. Shoot him in the back. Ma took the chillen to Shady
Bayou to grandpa.

"My grandpa come from Africy. I never see my other people ’cause dey
'longs to other masters. My grandpa die when he 115 year old.

"Elisha Guidry he my master in slavery. He had lots of slaves. He whip
my pa lots of times. He was unwillin’ to work. He whip my ma, too. One
time he cut her with the whip and cut one her big toes right off. Ma
come up on the gallery and wrap it up in a piece of rag.

"Us have a dirt house. The chimney made with mud. It’s a good house. It
hot in summer. The beds made with moss and shucks and the big old ticks
made at the big house. Us didn’t have no chairs. Jes’ benches. In the
room’s a big trough. Us sit ’round the trough and eat clabber and bread
with big, wood spoon. I eat many a meal that way myself.

"Dem’s moral times. A gal’s 21 ’fore she marry. They didn’t go wanderin’
'round all hours. They mammies knowed where they was. Folks nowadays is
wild and weak. The gals dress up come Sunday. All week they wear they
hair all roll up with cotton they unfold from the cotton boll. Sunday
come they comb the hair out fine. No grease on it. They want it natural
curly.

"Us have good food most time. Steel and log traps fo’ big game. Pit
traps in the woods ’bout so long and so deep, and kivered with bresh and
leaves. That cotch possum and coon and other things what come ’long in
the night. Us lace willow twigs and strings and put a cross piece on top
and bottom, and little piece of wood on top edge. The trap ’bout two
feet off the ground to cotch the birds. Doves, blackbirds, any kind
birds you can eat. Us clean them li’l birds good and rub ’em down in
lard. After they set awhile us broil ’em with plenty black pepper and
salt. Us shoot plenty ducks with musket, too.

"Greens was good, too. Us eat parsley greens and shuglar weed. That big,
two foot plant what have red flower on it. Us git lots of ’em in Wade’s
Bayou. Us put li’l bit flour in ashes and make ashcake. Us cook pumpkin
in ashes, too.

"After slavery I hoe cotton. No money at first, jes’ work on halves. The
trouble that there no equal halves. The white folks pay jes’ like they
wants. A man couldn’t work that way no time. I had to come over to Texas
’cause a man what want my land say I stoled a barrel from he house. He
try arres’ my old woman ’cause she say she find the barrel. Now, I never
have the case in lawsuit and I ’spect to die that way. But I has to stay
’way from Mauriceville for three year ’cause that man say I thiefed he
barrel.

"Things was bad after us come to Texas for a time. That Lizal Scizche,
he sho’ rough man. Us cropped on the share and he take the crop and the
money and lef’ fast. Us didn’t have a mess of nothin’ left.

"I manages to live by croppin’. I been here 52 year now. My first wife
name Massanne Florshann, that the French. My wife what I got now name
Annie. Massanne she give me six chillen and Annie four."
