


"I was born on the plantation of Dr. Andrew Scott, but my old ma'ster
was Col. Ben T. Embry. The 14th of March, in the year 1855, was my
birthday. Yes suh, I was born right here at old Galla Rock! My old
Ma'ster Embry had a good many slaves. He went to Texas and stayed
about three years. Took a lot of us along, and de first work I ever
done after I was set free was pickin' cotton at $2 a hundred pounds.
Dere was seventy-five or a hundred of us freed at once. Yes suh! Den
we drove five hundred miles back here from Texas, and drove five
hundred head of stock. We was refigees--dat's de reason we had to go
to Texas.

"Father and mother both passed away a good many years ago. Oh, yes,
dey was mighty well treated while dey was in slavery; never was a
kinder mas'r anywhere dan my old mas'r. And he was wealthy, too--had
lots of land, and a store, and plenty of other property. Many of the
slaves stayed on as servants long after the War, and lived right
around here at old Galla Rock.

"No suh, I never belonged to no chu'ch; dey thought I done too much of
the devil's work--playin' the fiddle. Used to play the fiddle for
dances all around the neighborhood. One white man gave me $10 once for
playin' at a dance. Played lots of the old-time pieces like 'Turkey in
the Straw', 'Dixie', and so on.

"We owns our home here, and I has another one. Been married twice and
raised eighteen chillun. Yes suh, we've lived here eighteen years, and
had fine health till last few years, but my health is sorter po'ly
now. Got a swellin' in my laigs.

"(Chuckling) I sure remembers lots of happy occasions down here in
days before the War. One day the steamboat come up to the landin'. It
was named the Maumelle--yes suh, Maumelle, and lots of hosses and
cattle was unloaded from the steamer. Sure was busy days then. And our
old mas'r was mighty kind to us."


NOTE: "Uncle Bill" did not know how he came about the name "Little."
Perhaps it was a nickname bestowed upon him to distinguish him from
some other William of larger stature. However, he stands fully six
feet in height, and has a strong, vigorous voice. He is the sole
surveying ex-slave of the Galla Rock community.
