
Julia Malone, 79, was born a slave of Judge Ellison, who owned a
thousand acre plantation near Lockhart, Texas. Julia’s mother was killed
by another slave. Julia stayed with the Ellison family several years
after she was freed. She lives at 305 Percy St., Fort Worth, Texas.*

"Jedge Ellison owned ’bout a tousand acres land near Lockhart, a few
miles up de Clear Fork river. Right dere I is borned, and it were a big
place and so many goin’ and comin’ it look like de beehive. De buildin’s
and sheds look like de li’l town.

"I ’member bein’ left in de nursery whilst my mammy work in de fields.
One night she go to de river for to wash clothes. She has to wash after
dark and so she am washin’ and a nigger slave sneak up on her and hit
her on de neck, and it am de death of her. So de woman what mammy allus
live with takes care of me den and when freedom came she moves to town,
but massa won’t let her took me. I stays on with him and runs errands,
while I is not fannin’ de new baby. Dey has six while I’m dere. I fans
dem till I drops asleep, and dat call for de whippin’.

"My foster mammy comes out and asks massa to let her have me, but he
won’t do dat. But she puts one over on him fin’ly and gits me anyway. He
am gone and missus am gone and I has to stay home alone with de last
baby, and a man and woman what was slaves on de place ’fore surrender,
comes by in a wagon and tells me to jump in. Dey takes me to my foster
mammy and she moves and won’t ’low me outside, so massa can’t ever find
me.

"She ’splains lots of things to me. I done see de women stick dere heads
in de washpot and talk out loud, while us in slavery. She tells me day
prayin’ for de Lawd to take dem out from bondage. Dey think it right to
pray out loud so de Lawd can hear but dey mustn’t let de massa hear dem.

"I asks her ’bout my father and she says him on de place but die ’fore
I’s borned. He was make de husband to lots of women on de place, ’cause
he de big man.

"She am good to me and care for me till I meets de boy I likes. Us lives
together for fifteen years and den him dies. My chillen is all dead. He
name am William Emerson and I waits nine years ’fore I marries ’gain.
Den I marries Albert Malone and I’s lucky ’gain. He’s de good man. One
day he am fixin’ de sills under de house and de whole house moves over
and falls on him. I feels so grievous over dat I never marries ’gain.
Dat thirty-four year ago, and I lives alone all de time. It ain’t ’cause
I doesn’t have de chance, ’cause lots of bucks wants me, ’cause I’s de
hard worker.

"I washes for de livin’ and washes old massa’s daughter’s clothes. Massa
am de powerful man durin’ slavery and have de money and fine clothes and
drives de fine teams and acts like de cock of de walk. All dat changes
after freedom. I seed him layin’ in de sun like de dog. I offers to wash
he clothes and he jus’ grunt. He done turned stone deaf, and de white
folks say it ’cause he done treat he slaves so bad.

"I done live here in Fort Worth ’bout fifteen years with my daughter,
Beulah Watkins. I’s mighty happy here, and has de $10.00 pension and
thanks de Lawd fer dat."
