C.B. McRay was born in Jasper, Texas, in 1861, a slave to John H.
McRay, a slave trader. C.B. is rather unapproachable, and has a
secretive manner, as though he believes the human race will bear a
little watching. He told of only one wife, but his present wife
explained, confidentially, that he has had six. He lives in Jasper.*

"My name is C.B. McRay, better knowed as ’Co’nstalk’, ’cause I’s long
and thin. Also knowed as ’Racer’, ’cause I useter be fleet on the feet.
When I’s ten year ole I often caught a rabbit what jump ’fore me, jus’
by runnin’ him down. Don’ see why my boys can’t do the same.

"I’s bo’n in Jasper, on Main street, right where Lanier’s Store stan’s,
on the 12th of April, in 1861. My father’s name was Calvin Bell McRay,
de same as mine, and mother’s name was Harriet McRay. Father was bo’n in
Virginny and mother in Sabine County, in Texas. My brudders’ names was
Bill McRay and Robert and Duckin Dacus. Father and mother was slaves
right here in Jasper, and so was my gran’parents, who was bo’n in
Africy.

"John McRay was us marster. He was call a ’nigger trader’, and was sich
a easy marster dat other people call he slaves, ’McRay’s free niggers’.
He make trips to New Orleans to buy slaves and brung ’em back and sol’
'em to de farmers. Missus was de bestes’ white woman to cullud folks dat
ever live.

"I’s too lil’ to wo’k much but I ’member lotsa things. Us have a big
dinin’-room with a big, long table for de cullud folks and us git jus’
the same kin’ of food dat the white folks have on dere table. Iffen a
nigger sass marster and he couldn’ control him, he was de fus’ one to be
sol’ and git rid of. He sol’ my uncle dat way. But marster was good to
us when we done right.

"The nigger women spinned and weaved cloth. I ’spec’ dat’s the onlies’
place in Jasper whar you could go any time of day and see a parlor full
of nigger women, sittin’ up dere fat as dey could be and with lil’ to
do. Marster have no plantation for de men to wo’k but he rented lan’ for
them to cult’vate.

"Marster’s niggers all got Sunday clothes and shoes. Every one of dem
have to dress and come to the parlor so he could look dem over ’fore dey
goes to church.

"Us have a foreman, name Charlie. It was his duty to keep de place
stock’ with wood. He take slaves and wo’k de wood patches when it
needed, but onct marster come home from New Orleans and foun’ dem all
sufferin’ for want of fire. He call ole Charlie and ask him why he not
git up plenty wood. ’Well,’ old Charlie say, ’wood was short and ’fore I
could git more dis col’ spell come and it too awful col’ to git wood.’
Marster say, ’You keep plenty wood or I gwinter sell you to a mean
marster.’ Charlie git better for a while, then he let wood git low
again. So he was sol’ to Ballard Adams, who had the name of bein’ hard
on his slaves. Charlie couldn’ do enough wo’k to suit Marster Adams, so
he put him in what’s knowed as the ’Louisiana shirt.’ Dat was a barrel
with a hole cut in the bottom jus’ big enough for Charlie to slip he
head through. Dey pull dis on to him every mornin’ and then he couldn’
sit down or use he arms, coul’ jus’ walk ’roun’ all day, de brunt of
other slaves’ jokes. At night dey took it off and chain him to he bed.
After he have wo’n dis Louisiana shirt a month de marster task he again.
He fail and run off to the woods. So Marster Adams, he come to Marster
McRay and want to sell Charlie back again, but he couldn’, ’cause
freedom jus’ come and they couldn’ sell slaves no more, but Marster
McRay say Charlie coul’ come back and stay on he place if he wanted to.


[Illustration: _C.B. McRay_]


"Dey didn’ try to teach us readin’ and writin’, but Miss Mary read de
Bible to us every Sunday. Iffen us git sick dey git ol Dr. Haynes or Dr.
Perkins.

"When us chillun, we plays ’Town Ball’ and marbles. Mother’s fav’rite
lullaby was Bye-o Baby Buntin’.

"I never seed any sojers till after de War close, den I seed dem camp on
Court House Square right here in Jasper. When freedom was ’clared, Miss
Mary call us niggers into the parlor and den Marster McRay come and tol’
us we’s free. He ’vise ’em to wo’k ’round Jasper, whar they knows
people, and says iffen any wan’s to stay with him to please rise up.
Every person riz up. So dey all stay with him for a time. After ’while
he ’gin to rent and cult’vate differen’ plantation, and dere treatment
not so good, so dey ’gin to be dissatisy and pull loose."
