
Andy Nelson, 76, is leader of a small rural settlement of negroes known
as Moser Valley, ten miles east of Fort Worth on State Highway #15. He
was born a slave to J. Wolf, on a Denton County farm, and his mother
belonged to Dr. John Barkswell, who owned an adjoining farm. At the
death of his father he was sold to Dr. Barkswell. When freed, he and his
mother came to Birdville and later moved to Moser Valley, which derives
it name from Telley Moses, who gave his farm to his slaves, and sold
parcels to other negroes.*

"I don’ ’member much ’bout de war, but I was bo’n in slavery near de
line of Tarrant County, in 1861. My master was named Wolf, but ’bout de
end of de war he sells me to Dr. Barkswell, who owns my mammy.

"When de war is over we gits out and comes to Birdville and after three
years Master Moser gives my mammy 17 acres of lan’. He owned lots of
slaves and gives ’em all some land for a home.

"For ten, twelve years after de war, de Klux gits after de niggers who
is gittin’ into devilment. De cullud folks sho’ quavered when they
thought de Klan was after them. One nigger crawls up de chimney of de
fireplace and that nigger soon gits powerful hot and has to come out.
You should of seen that nigger. He warn’t human lookin’. He is all soot,
fussed up, choked and skeered. Dey warn’t after him but wants to ask him
if he knows whar other niggers is hidin’. I was too young to git in no
picklement with de Klux.

"Years after dat, I’se married and have four, five chillens, and I’se
comin’ home. I’se stopped by seven men on hosses and dey all has rifles
and pistols. I says to myself, ’De Klux sho’ have come back and dey is
gwine to git me. It sho’ looks like troublement.’

"One of dem weighs ’bout 135 pounds and has dark hair and complexiun,
and he says to me, ’Nigger, whar’s de lower Dalton crossin’? Dere was
two crossin’s of de Trinity River, de upper and de lower. I says, ’De
upper crossin’ is back yonder.’

"He says, ’I knows whar de upper crossin’ is, I’se askin’ you whar de
lower one is. Don’ fool with us, nigger.’

"Dere was a big fellow, ’bout 250, settin’ in de saddle and sorta ant
goglin’, with his gun pointin’ at me. De hole in de end of dat gun
looked big as a cannon. He was mean lookin’ and chewin’ a quid of
terbaccy. He says, ’You is goin’ with us to de crossin’. Lead de way.’
Den I gits de quaverment powerful bad. I knows I’se a gone nigger.

"I says to dem, ’I done nothin’,’ and de big fellow raises his gun and
says, ’Git goin’, nigger, to dat lower crossin’, or you’ll be a dead
nigger.’

"On de way I never says a word, but I’se prayin’ de good Lawd to save
dis nigger. When we reached de crossin’ I says to myself, ’Dis am de
end.’

"De little fellow says, ’Do you know who I is?’ I says, ’No.’

"He says, ’I’se Sam Bass.’

"I’se heered of Sam Bass, everybody had in dem days. He was leader of a
band.

"He says, ’We don’ want nobody to know we been here. Which you ruther
be, a dead nigger befo’ or after tellin’?’

"De big fellow says, ’Make a sno’ job. A dead nigger cain’t talk,’ and
den starts raisin’ de gun.

"I wants to talk, but I’se so skeered I can’ say one word.

"Den Sam Bass says, ’No, no! Let him go,’ and den I knows de Lawd has
heered dis nigger’s prayers.

"Dey tells me dey’s comin’ back if I tells and I promised not to tell.
I’se skeered for a week after dat.

"In a few weeks, I hears dat Sam Bass is killed at Round Rock. Den I
tells.

"Dat’s de las’ troublement I’se been in. Since dat I’se been busy
earnin’ vittles for de family. I’se been married 40 years and we’uns has
14 chillen and 10 of ’em are livin’. If it warn’t for dis farm and de
work white folks give me, I don’ know how I could of got on. We gits a
pension of $21 every month from de state and dat helps a heap.

"I’se never had no schoolin’. Dey used to think us cullud folks has no
use for edumacation. I thinks diff’rent and sends my chillen to school.
Dey reads to me from de papers and sich."
