



Will Oats, 84 years of age, was born in Wayne County, up Spring Valley
in 1854. He was the son of Betty Oats and Will Garddard of North
Carolina. He has three sisters: Lucy Wilson, Frances Phillips that live
in Ohio, and Alice Branton of Mercer County, Kentucky. He has two
brothers; Jim Coffey and Lige Coffey of Harrodsburg.

As a child he lived with his mother, brothers, sisters, and grandmother.
Their quarters were in the yard of their master; and they were as
comfortable as any slaves--with plenty to eat and clothes to keep them
warm.

Will was just a boy at that time, and he cut wood and carried it in; and
did other chores around the house such as help to milk and feed the
stock. Their food was plentiful and they ate all kinds of vegetables,
and had plenty of milk and butter, fat meat, and bread.

The family all wore home made clothing, cotton shirts, heavy shoes, very
heavy underwear; and if they wore out their winter shoes before the
spring weather they had to do without until the fall.

Will was owned by Lewis Oats and his sister; they lived in a two story
house, built of log and weather boarded. They were very wealthy people.
The farm consisted of over 230 acres; they owned six slaves; and they
had to be up doing their morning work before the master would wake.

When working and the slaves would disobey their master, they were
punished in some way; but there was no jail. They didn't know how to
read or write, and they had no church to attend. All they had to do when
not at work was to talk to the older folks. On Christmas morning they
would usually have a little extra to eat and maybe a stick of candy. On
New Year's Day their work went on just the same as on any other day.

Will, as a boy loved to play marbles which was about the most
interesting game they had to play. Of course, they could play outside as
all children do now when they had spare time.

At that time there were few doctors and when the slaves would get hurt
or sick, they were usually looked after by the master or by their
overseer.

After the war had closed, Will's grandmother walked from Monticello to
Camp Nelson to get her free papers and her children. They were all very
happy, but they were wondering what they were going to do without a
home, work, or money. But after Will and his mother and grandmother got
their freedom, the grandmother bought a little land and house and they
all went there to live. Of course, they worked out for other people and
raised a great deal of what they ate. Will lived there until he grew
older and went out for himself; and later moved to Mercer County where
he now lives.

Bibliography:
Interview with Will Oats, Ex-Slave of Mercer County.
