
Martha Patton was born 91 years ago in Alabama, slave to the Lott
family, who came to Texas about 1847 and settled near Goliad. After
marrying and bearing two children, surviving a famine and scarcity of
water, she was freed. She, her husband and others of her family leased
farm land on the San Antonio River near La Bahia Mission, at Goliad.*

"Yes’m, I was bo’n befo’ de war. Best I kin remember, I’ll be 91 years
old come June 15, 1937. I was bo’n in Alabama, but was brought to Texas
when I was nine months old. My folks stopped at Goliad, on de creek near
to Goliad.

"I ’member seein’ de soldiers, but t’weren’t no fightin’ ’round us no
closer den Corpus Christi. One day one of my uncles went to Corpus
Christi. He say, ’Dey done tol’ all de women and chillen to git outta
town.’ We done heard ’em shootin’ bombs. De smoke was so thick it looked
like it were cloudy. De soldiers come through and took anything dey
wanted outta de stores. Pretty soon nothin’ was left in de stores and
dey couldn’ git no more.

"My mother was a cook. We chillen brought in wood and water. My uncles
had cotton patches. My master sol’ dere cotton for dem and dey had money
to buy shoes or anything dey needed. We picked cotton and picked peas.
We had a spinnin’ wheel and a weave(loom). We made cloth, blankets and
our own stockin’s. We made dye outta live oak bark, mesquite bark, pecan
leaves. They made a dark brown and it dyed the cloth and blankets
pretty.

"I never saw any slaves whipped, nor any with chains on. Our white
people were very good to us. Their name was Lott, Jim Lott, yes’m, me
and Jim Lott was chillen together. He sure was a good boy. He died over
at Goliad las’ yea’.

"We made cotton and wool cloth both, yes’m, we made both. We raised
cotton. The sheep were so po’ they would die. We would go through de
woods and find de dead sheep and pick de wool offen ’em. Then we would
wash de wool and spin it into thread and weave it into cloth to make
wool clothes.

"My man, he worked in de tan ya’d. He fixed de hides to make us all de
shoes we had, and dey made harness and saddles fo’ de gov’nment--fo’ de
soldiers. To make de lime to take de hair off of de hides, dey would
burn limestone rocks. Then dey would hew out troughs and soak de hides
in lime water till all the hair come off. Den dey would take ’ooze’ made
from red oak bark and rub the hides till dey were soft and dry.

"Dey sho was hard times after de war, and durin’ de war too. Our white
folk was good to us, but we had a time to get pervisions. Sometimes we
had co’n meal and sometimes we would have flour. We would pa’ch co’n
meal and make coffee. When we could git ’em we used pertater peelings,
pa’ched, for coffee. Sometimes we drank wild sage tea.

"When we could, we would go over on de Brazos to de molasses mills and
get molasses and brown sugar; when we couldn’t, we had to do widout de
sweetenin’.

"Water sho was sca’ce. We had to tote it about half a mile from de hole.
De creeks just dried up, only ’long in holes. De wells was all dried up.
There would be dead cows lyin’ on t’other side of de hole and
grasshoppers thick on de water, but we jist skimmed de water off and
went on. Didn’t make us sick, lady, ’twas all we had and de good Lo’d
took ca’e of us.

"De grasshoppers sho was bad ’long ’bout fo’ or five in de ebenin’; dey
would be so thick de sun would be cloudy lookin’. Dey was a little
speckled grasshopper. Yes’m, red and speckled. De chickens and hawgs et
'em. Dey et so many grasshoppers de meat was bright red. You couldn’t
eat it.

"Twa’n’t no use to send fo’ a docta, no’m, ’cause dey didn’t have no
medicine. My grandmother got out in de woods and got ’erbs. She made
sage ba’m (balm). One thing I recomember, she would take co’n shucks--de
butt end of de shucks--and boil ’em and make tea. ’Twould break de
chills and fever. De Lo’d fixed a way. We used roots for medicine too.

"Dey was salt lakes. De men would get a wagonbed full of salt and take
it to town and trade it for flour. De men would take de old ox wagons
and go down to Mexico towa’ds Brownsville to git pervisions.
Coffee--real coffee--was a dollar a poun’. De men what used terbaccer
had to pay a dollar a plug. Cotton cloth was fifty and sixty cents a
ya’d.

"Durin’ de war de white people had church in their homes. Dey would have
church in de mornin’ and in de afternoon dey would preach to de slaves.

"After de war, we all leased land on de ribbah fum de white folks--my
uncles, my brothers and alls. We leased de land fo’ six years. At de end
of dat time most of us bought places.

"When de war was over and we moved, de men put up a picket house. Dr.
McBride, a soldier, taught school. When de crops was laid by, all de men
and women went to school. De chillen went all de time. We had log seats
and a dirt flo’. We would have meetin’s in de school house. Twasn’t
fine, but we had good times.

"We lived clost to de old mission, built during Santa Anna’s war, I
think it were.

"I has ten chillen; seven of them are living. I have fifteen or nineteen
grandchillen, but I don’t know where dey all are or what dey are doing."
