Mary Anne Patterson, who now lives with her daughter, Elizabeth Lee, in
Austin, Texas, was born in Louisiana, but she does not know exactly
where. She is between 97 and 102 years old. Mary and her mother belonged
to Col. Aaron Burleson of Rogers’ Hill, Travis County, Texas.*

"Way back yonder my name was Mary Anne Burleson and I’s born in
Louisiana somewhere. I knows I’s told dey brung me and my mammy to Texas
when I’s eighteen months old, and dat Massa Turner what brung us, sold
us to Col. Aaron Burleson. Massa Burleson buy both of us, ’cause he a
good man and didn’t ’lieve in separatin’ a chile from de mammy. I do
think dat man gone to Heaven.

"When I growed up it was my job to wet nuss Rufe Burleson, ’cause he
mammy didn’t have ’nough milk for him. Beside dat, I helped in de loom
room and have to spin five cuts de day, but I’s fast ’nough to make
eight cuts.

"Durin’ cotton pickin’ time I larns to count a little, ’cause I picks de
cotton, brung it to de wagon and listen to ’em countin’ on dem scales.
Purty soon I could of counted my own cotton.

"Massa Burleson good to we’uns and when a woman have a chile and no
husband to take care of her, he make a man go out and chop wood for her,
and dat slave had better act like he wants to. Massa so good to us he
have lumber hauled clear from de Bastrop pineries and builds us good
wood dwellin’s. He have de plantation on Rogers’ Hill what am east of
Austin.

"Now, let me tell you ’bout de cooks. Massa Burleson have de cook for de
big house and de cook for de slaves. Dere a kitchen in de big house for
de white folks and dere a kitchen with a long table for de hands. We had
purty good victuals and I ’member we have so much hawg meat we’d throw
de hog’s head and feet ’way. Massa raised he own hawgs and everythin’ he
et, we had it, too. Sometimes we et deer meat and dere times we had bear
meat and honey, ’cause Massa Burleson have he own bees, too.

"I ’member how at sweet ’tater time my mammy’d sneak out to de patch and
scratch up some sweet ’taters. When Massa Burleson finds de ’taters
gone, he jes’ say, ’Now, I know nobody done dis but de Lawd!’

"I seed many a Injun and seed ’em in droves. Dem Injuns never bothered
us. A old Injun call Placedo and he son come on down to massa’s place
and he give ’em plenty food. When de Injuns come near de cattle’d bellow
and cut up, ’cause dey knowed it was Injuns ’round.


[Illustration: _Mary Anne Patterson_]


"When I’s ’bout 20 years old I marries Alex Patterson and he was brung
from Tennessee to Texas and owned by Massa Joshua Patterson. After
freedom we rents land from Massa Patterson and lives dere and farms
'bout seven years.

"Me and Alex has 15 chillen and six of dem is still livin’. Dere is two
here in Texas and two in California and one in Oklahoma and one in
Kansas. My husband am dead now and I’s alone.

"I owns a little farm of 36 acres out near Rogers’ Hill and I gits sixty
dollars de year for de rentin’ of dat land and now de folks wants me to
sell it. But my husband bought dat place and I wants to keep it. I don’t
git no pension. I know dis much, I’s worked harder since after freedom
den I ever worked befo’ freedom."
