


"I am 80 years old, you know after 79 comes 80, dats how old I am. A
year ago, a little over a year ago, I wus 79 by de age in de Bible. My
son Ernest Riddick tole me dat. He is gone to Greensboro to work. He
carried de Bible wid him. If I had de Bible I could tell de story
better den I can. My full name is Charity Riddick and my husband wus
Weldon Riddick. He is dead. My father wus named Lewis Jones. Mother wus
named Haley Jones. I had three brothers, Washington, William and
Turner, two sisters Mary and Celia. All my people are dead except my
sons. I have three sons livin'.

"I got sick an' I got way down in my taxes. I am payin' a dollar on' em
every time I can get it. I ain't able to work much. I chops in de
garden to make a little to eat. My sons help me some. Dey have children
you know, but dey send me a little. Dey is all married. One has eight
chillun, the other five chillun and de third has four chillun. Dey
can't help me much.

"I belonged to Madison Pace in slavery time. He dead an' gone long ago
do'. My missus wus name Mis' Annie Pace. Sometimes I got plenty to eat
and sometimes I didn't. All I got came through my mother from marster
and missus. I was in my mother's care. I wus so young dey didn't have
much to do with me. The plantation wus about three miles east o'
Raleigh.

"Dis house did belong to me, but I am a long way behind on it. Dey lets
me stay here and pay what I kin. I rents a room to an old lady fer 75
cents a week. I buys oil and wood wid it. De lights has been cut off. I
uses a oil lamp fur light. Lights done cut off. I can't pay light rent,
no sir, I haint been able to pay dat in a long time.

"In slavery time when de people you call de Yankees come, I wus small,
but father took us and left the plantation. We lived in Raleigh after
that. Father did not stay on de plantation anymore but he farmed around
Raleigh as long as he lived. He made corn, peas, potatoes and other
things to feed us with. I used to hear 'em talk about de Ku Klux. We
wus mighty afraid of dem.

"I used to hear my father say he had a very good master. My min' is not
good but I remember we used water from a spring and lived in a little
log house out from my master's 'great house'. I remember sein' de
slaves but I do not remember how many dere wus. I never saw a slave
whupped. My mother's son wus sold, that wus my brother Washington wus
sold away from her before de surrender. Mother cried a lot about it. I
remember sein' her cry about my brother bein' sold.

"I remember sein' de Yankees. Dey told us dey were the Blue Jackets dat
set us free. I wus afraid o' dem. I am old enough to have been dead
long ago. Guess it is the mercy of the Lord dats lets me live.

"All I know about Abraham Lincoln is what I been told. Dey say, I think
dey said he set de slaves free. I don't know much good or bad about Mr.
Roosevelt. I can't read and write. Dey would not let a nigger have any
books. Dey were perticular 'bout dat. When dey tole us 'bout de Bible
dey say it say obey your marster. Dis is 'bout all I 'members. Yes,
'bout all I 'members."

AC
