Annie Row, 86, was born a slave to Mr. Charles Finnely, who owned a
plantation in Nacogdoches Co., near Rusk, Texas. She has lived at 920
Frank St., Fort Worth, since 1933.*

"I was sho’ born in slavery and as near as I knows, I mus’ be ’bout 86
year old, from what my mammy tells me. I figgers that, ’cause I was old
enough to clean de wool when de War starts and dey didn’t generally put
de chilluns to work ’fore they’s ten year old.

"Marster Charley owned my mammy and my four sisters and two brothers but
my pappy was owned by Marster John Kluck, and his place was ’bout five
mile from Marster Charley’s plantation. My pappy was ’lowed a pass every
two weeks for to come and see him’s family, but him sees us more often
than that, ’cause him sneak off every time him have de chance.

"Allus cullud folks lived in de cullud quarters. De cabins was built
with logs and dey have no floor. Dey have bunks for to sleep on and de
fireplace. In de summer time mos’ de cullud folks sleeps outside, and
we’uns had to fight mosquitoes in de night and flies in de day. They was
flies and then some more flies, with all dere relations, in them cabins.

"De food am mostly cornmeal and ’lasses and meat that am weighed out and
has to last you de week. De truth am, lots of time we’uns goes hungry.
Everything dat am worn and eat was raised on de place, ’cept salt and
pepper and stuff like that. Dey raise de cotton and de wheat, and de
corn and de cane, ’sides de fruit and sich, and de chickens and de sheep
and de cows and de hawgs.

"De marster has two overseers what tends to de work and ’signs each
nigger to do de certain work and keep de order. Shoes was made by a
shoemaker what am also de tanner. Cloth for de clothes was made by de
spinners and weavers and that what they larned me to do. My first work
was teasin’ de wool. I bets you don’t know what teasin’ de wool am. It
am pickin’ de burrs and trash and sich out of de wool for to git it
ready for de cardin’.

"Now for de treatment, does yous want to know ’bout that? Well, ’twarnt
good. When dis nigger am five year old, de marster give me to him’s son,
Marster Billy. That am luck for me, ’cause Marster Billy am real good to
me, but Marster Charley am powerful cruel to hims slaves. At de work,
him have de overseers drive ’em from daylight ’til dark, and whups ’em
for every little thing what goes wrong. When dey whups dey ties de
nigger over de barrel and gives so many licks with de rawhide whup. I
seed slaves what couldn’t git up after de whuppin’s. Some near died
'cause of de punishment.

"Dey never give de cullud folks de pass for to go a-visitin’, nor ’lows
parties on de place. As fer to go to church, shunt that from yous head.
Why, we’uns wasn’ even ’lowed to pray. Once my mammy slips off to de
woods near de house to pray and she prays powerful loud and she am
heard, and when she come back, she whupped.

"My mammy and me not have it so hard, ’cause she de cook and I ’longs to
Marster Billy. Him won’t let ’em whump me iffen he knows ’bout it. But
one time, when I’s ’bout six year, I stumbles and breaks a plate and de
missy whups me for that. Here am de scar on my arm from that whuppin!

"After dey has argument dey never whups me when Marster Billy ’round.
Lots of time him say, ’Come here, Bunch,’--dey calls me Bunch, ’cause
I’s portly--and him have something good for me to eat.

"After that, it wasn’t long ’fore de War starts and de marster’s two
boys, Billy and John, jines de army. I’s powerful grieved and cries two
days and all de time Marster Billy gone I worries ’bout him gittin’
shoot. De soldiers comes and goes in de crib and takes all de corn, and
makes my mammy cook a meal. Marster Charley cuss everything and
everybody and us watch out and keep out of his way. After two years him
gits a letter from Marster Billy and him say him be home soon and that
John be kilt. Missy starts cryin’ and de Marster jumps up and starts
cussin’ de War and him picks up de hot poker and say, ’Free de nigger,
will dey? I free dem.’ And he hit my mammy on de neck and she starts
moanin’ and cryin’ and draps to de floor. Dere ’twas, de Missy
a-mournin’, my mammy a-mournin’ and de marster a-cussin’ loud as him
can. Him takes de gun offen de rack and starts for de field whar de
niggers be a-workin’. My sister and I sees that and we’uns starts
runnin’ and screamin’, ’cause we’uns has brothers and sisters in de
field. But de good Lawd took a hand in that mess and de marster ain’t
gone far in de field when him draps all of a sudden. De death sets on de
marster and de niggers comes runnin’ to him. Him can’t talk or move and
dey tote him in de house. De doctor comes and de nex’ day de marster
dies.

"Den Marster Billy comes home and de break up took place with freedom
for de niggers. Mos’ of ’em left as soon’s dey could.

"De missy gits very con’scending after freedom. De women was in de
spinnin’ house and we’uns ’spects another whuppin’ or scoldin’, ’cause
that de usual doin’s when she comes. She comes in and says, ’Good
mornin’, womens,’ and she never said sich ’fore. She say she pay wages
to all what stays and how good she treat ’em. But my pappy comes and
takes us over to de Widow Perry’s land to work for share.

"After that, de missy found Marster Billy in de shed, dead, with him
throat cut and de razor side him. Dere a piece of paper say he not care
for to live, ’cause de nigger free and dey’s all broke up.

"After five years I marries George Summers and we lives in Rusk. We’uns
has seven chilluns. He goes and I marries Rufus Jackson and on Saturday
we marries and on Monday we walks down de street and Rufus accident’ly
steps on a white man’s foot and de white man kills him with a pistol.

"I marries ’gain after two years to Charles Row. Dat nigger, I plum
quits after one year, ’cause him was too rough. Him jealous and tote de
razor with him all de time and sleep with it under him pillow. Shucks,
him says he carry on dat way ’cause him likes me. I don’t want any
nigger to shew his ’fection for me dat way, so I transports myself from
him.

"I makes a livin’ workin’ for de white folks ’til four year ago and now
I lives with my daughter, Minnie Row. Guess I’ll live here de balance of
my life--’twont be long."
