


"I was born about 1849 in the Dutch Fork section of Newberry County,
S.C. I was slave of Ivey Suber and his good wife. My daddy was Bill
Suber and my mammy was Mary Suber. I was hired by Marse Suber as a nurse
in the big house, and I waited on my mistress when she was sick, and was
at her bed when she died. I had two sisters and a brother and when we
was sold they went to Mr. Suber's sister and I stayed with him.

"My master was good to his slaves. He give them plenty to eat, good
place to sleep and plenty of clothes. The young men would hunt lots,
rabbits, possums, and birds. My white folks had a big garden and we had
eats from it. They was good cooks, too, and lived good. We card and spin
and weave our own clothes on mistress's spinning wheels.

"Marse Suber had one overseer who was good to us. We went to work at
sun-up and worked 'till sun-down, none of us worked at night. We
sometimes got a whipping when we wouldn't work or do wrong, but it
wasn't bad.

"We never learned to read and write. We had no church and no school on
the plantation, but we could go to the white folk's church and sit in
the gallery. Some of us was made to go, and had to walk 10 miles. Of
course, we never thought much about walking that far. I joined the
church because I was converted; I think everybody ought to join the
church.

"The patrollers rode 'round and ketched slaves who ran away without
passes. They never bothered us. When our work was over at night, we
stayed home, talked and went to sleep. On Saturday afternoons white
folks sometimes give us patches of ground to work, and we could wash up
then, too. We raised corn on the patches and some vegetables. On Sunday
we just rested and went to neighbor's house or to church. On Christmas
we had big eats.

"Corn-shuckings and cotton-pickings always had suppers when work was
done. Master made whiskey up at his sister's place, and at these suppers
he had whiskey to give us.

"When we was sick we had a doctor--didn't believe much in root teas.

"I married when I was 15 years old at a white man's place, Mr. Sam
Cannon's. A negro man named Jake Cannon married us. Supper was give us
by Mr. Sam Cannon after it was over.

"When freedom came, my mother moved away, but I stayed on.

"I think Abraham Lincoln was a good man, and Jeff Davis was a good man.
I don't know anything about Booker Washington."


  SOURCE: Lila Rutherford (86), Newberry, S.C., RFD
  Interviewer: G. Leland Summer, 1707 Lindsey St.,
  Newberry, S.C.
