
Hannah Scott was born in slavery, in Alabama. She does not know her age
but says she was grown when her last master, Bat Peterson, set her free.
Hannah lives with her grandson in a two-room house near the railroad
tracks, in Houston, Texas. Unable to walk because of a paralytic stroke,
Hannah asked her grandson to lift her from the bed to a chair, from
which she told her story.*

"Son, move de chair a mite closer to de stove. Dere, dat’s better,
'cause de heat kind of soople me up. Ain’t nothin’ left of me but some
skin and bones, nohow.

"Lemme see now. I’s born in Alabama and I think dey calls it Fayette
County. Mama’s name was Ardissa and she ’long to Marse Clark Eccles, but
us chillen allus call him White Pa. Miss Hetty, his wife, we calls her
White Ma.

"I never knowed my own pa, ’cause he ’long to ’nother man and was sold
away ’fore I’s old ’nough to know him. Mama has five us chillen, but dey
all dead ’ceptin’ me. Dey didn’t have no marriage back den like now. Dey
just puts black folks together in de sight of man and not in de sight of
Gawd, and dey puts dem asunder, too.

"Marse Eccles didn’t have no big place and only nine slaves. I guess he
what you calls ’poor folks,’ but he mighty good to he black folks. I
'member when he sold us to Bat Peterson. He and White Ma break down and
cry when old Bat puts us in de wagon and takes us off to Arkansas. I
heared mama say something ’bout White Pa sellin’ us for debt and he gits
a hunerd dollars for me.

"Whoosh, it sho’ was a heap dif’ent from Alabama. Marse Bat had niggers.
I reckon he must of had a hunerd of dem and two nigger drivers, Uncle
Green and Uncle Jake, and a overseer. Marse Bat was mean, too, and work
he slaves from daylight till nine o’clock at night. I carries water for
de hands. I carries de bucket on my head and ’fore long I ain’t got no
more hair on my head den you has on de palm of you hand. No, suh!

"When I gits bigger, de overseer puts me in de field with de rest. Marse
Bat grow mostly cotton and it don’t make no dif’ence is you big or li’l,
you better keep up or de drivers burn you up with de whip, sho’ ’nough.
Old Marse Bat never put a lick on me all de years I ’longs to him, but
de drivers sho’ burnt me plenty times. Sometime I gits so tired come
night, I draps right in de row and gone to sleep. Den de driver come
'long and, wham, dey cuts you ’cross de back with de whip and you wakes
up when it lights on you, yes, suh! ’Bout nine o’clock dey hollers
'cotton up’ and dat de quittin’ signal. We goes to de quarters and jes’
drap on de bunk and go to sleep without nothin’ to eat.

"On old Bat’s place dat all us know, is work and more work. De onlies’
time we has off am Sunday and den we has to wash and mend clothes. De
first Sunday of de month a white preacher come, but all he say is
'bedience to de white folks, and we hears ’nough of dat without him
tellin’ us.

"I ’member when White Pa come to try git mama and us chillen back. We
been in Arkansas five, six year, and, whoosh, I sho’ wants to go back to
my White Pa, but old Bat wouldn’t let us go. He come to our quarters dat
night and tell mama if she or us chillen try to run off he’ll kill us.
Dey sho’ watch us for awhile.

"Sometimes one of de niggers runs off but he ain’t gone long. He gits
hongry and comes back. Den he gits a burnin’ with de bullwhip. Does he
run ’way again, Marse Bat say he got too much rabbit in him and chains
him up till he goes to Little Rock and sells him.

"I heared some white folks treat dey slaves good and give dem time off,
but Marse Bat don’t. We has plenty to eat and clothes, but dat all. Dat
de way it was till we’s freed, only it wasn’t in Arkansas. It was down
to Richmond, here in Texas, ’cause Marse Bat rents a farm at Richmond.
He thunk if he brung us to Texas he wouldn’t have to set us free. But he
got fooled, ’cause a gov’ment man come tell us we’s free. We had de crop
planted and old Bat say if we’ll stay through pickin’ he’ll pay us. Mama
and us stayed awhile.

"I gits married legal with Richard Scott and we comes to Harrisburg and
he gits a job on de section of de railroad. I’s lived here ever since.
My husban’ and me raises five chillen, but only de one gal am alive now.
My grandson takes care of me. He tells me iffen my husband lived so
long, he be 107 years old. I know he was older dan me, but not ’xactly
how much.

"Sometime I feel I’s been here too long, ’cause I’s paralyzed and can’t
move round none. But maybe de Lawd ain’t ready for me yet, and de Debbil
won’t have me."
