"I was born after the surrender at Oxford, Mississippi. We belong to
Master Jim Smith. Mother cooked and father worked in the field. He was
on a average being good. They didn't trouble my mother as I recollect
hearing 'em say but they whooped them in the field. Pattyrollers chased
papa in sometimes. I heard him talk about it but I couldn't tell what he
said now. Mama had two before freedom, then she married and had three
children. He died. She married the second time and had two more
children. That made seben in all.

"She said her first marriage was pronounced (announced). My mother said
their master refugeed them to Texas till the year of the surrender. They
didn't know nothing 'bout freedom till a while after they got back
from Texas. They stayed on that year and longer too not knowing 'bout
freedom. My rickerliction is short.

"Frank Houston was a neighbor of our'n. He lived on my folks' joining
plantation close to Houston, Mississippi during slavery. During or
before the War come on he put his money in a barrel--hogshead. They
said it was gold and silver. I don't know. It might some been paper. He
rolled the barrel down to the river. It was the Tallahassee (?) River
eighteen miles northeast of Oxford, Mississippi. He hid his barrel of
money in the river. They hunted and hunted it and never could find it.
It might sunk in the mud and quick sand. Somebody might er hauled it out
and stole it. The whole neighborhood hope him hunt it. They never did
find it. I seen the old man and Jim Smith heaps of times.

"I voted in Mississippi. I couldn't read. They had a big fight in the
country at Midway Church where we all voted. It was out a ways from
Oxford, Mississippi. I never voted in Arkansas. I pay poll tax. Never
'lowed to vote.

"I never went to school a day in my life.

"I come to Forrest City fifty-four years ago. Married here. Never had a
child. Now my wife dead. I farmed all my life. I bought a farm but they
never let me have it. I never got it all paid out. They took it.

"I get Welfare help. I does some work. I'm nearly past hard work now."
