


"I liked to went crazy when my brother, Bob, went to Arkansas. Den Marse
George Young wrote our names in a book and give it to my ma. It was jes'
a small mem'randum book. We kept it till Miss Addie, dat is Mrs. Billy,
give ma de Bible storybook, and den she copied our names in dat one. De
little book was about wore out den; so it was burned up when Miss Addie
had done finished writing our names in de storybook. Us gwine to keep
dat book and hand it down atter we done left dis earth. Ma been dead now
over fifty years.

"I sho nu'sed Marse George's chilluns fer him, when I was a little gal.
Jimmie, Willie, Conquest, Jack, Katie and Annie was Marse's chilluns.
Conquest dead now. Marse George had a great big house. He was a jes'tice
of de peace or something or 'nother den. I don't know what year my ma
died, but Marse had her buried at New Chapel. Dat same year we raised a
big crop of corn, cotton and peanuts, and had plenty hogs. Marse let us
have all we wanted. He let us hang our meat in his smokehouse dat year.

"Befo' ma died and I was a little gal, a terrible thing happened to us.
Across de Enoree on another place, de Miller place, Fannie Miller run
away. Dey couldn't find her fer a long time. Dey told my marster to git
her. One Sunday my ma got ready to dress me fer Sunday school. She
bathed me and when she looked in de drawer she couldn't find my clothes.
All of her clothes was gone, too. I cried 'cause I couldn't go to Sunday
school. Maude, de woman what lived next to us, went to church. She saw
Fannie dar wid all ma's clothes on. She told Marse about it and he sont
out and had Fannie caught. She had come to our house and got de clothes
on Saturday evening. She had dem hid in a old house on our place. Dey
put her in jail, and den her marster come and whupped her and sont de
clothes back to ma. She never tried to run off agin.

"Jack Gist, a slave of Gov. Gist, run away once and lived in a cave fer
five months befo' de white folks found him. He went down on 'de forest'
and dug a cave near de road in sight of de Harris Bridge which still
spans de Fairforest Creek at dat p'int. De cave wasn't dug on Governor
Gist's land, but on a place know'd den as de old Jackson place. In de
mid hours of night Jack come to see his friends and dey give him things
to eat. When dey got him he had a hog, two geese, some chickens and two
middles of meat. Cose de hog and de middles was stole.

"One night he was crossing de Fairforest Creek on a foot-log and he met
Anderson Gist, one of de Governor's slaves. Dey talked fer awhile. Next
morning, Anderson come wid his marster to de cave whar Jack was. Dey
took all his things on to de big house, and he was whupped and put back
to work. Governor Gist and our marster was good to deir slaves and dey
didn't punish 'em hard like some of 'em did. We had lots more den dan we
has had ever since.

"I never went to de field till atter freedom come. Dey wasn't hard on us
in de fields and I liked to work. We worked mostly from sun-up till it
was too dark to work. Marster's youngest girl, Mary Jane Young, married
Mr. Dave Lane. Dey didn't have a wedding.

"My grandpa was a African and he talked real funny. He was low, chunky,
fat and real black. He went around a lot befo' he died. He was de father
of my mother, Clora. Granny, his wife, was called 'Fender' and she died
de first year of freedom. She was sold and lived on a neighboring
plantation. We went to see her every Saturday. Ma would always take us
to see her, and if we didn't git to go, she come to see us. We liked to
go, and Marse always give us a pass. De patrollers watch us like a hawk,
but we had our passes and we told dem if dey bothered us our marster
would handle 'em. He would, too, 'cause dat was 'de law'. Granny Fender
was good looking. She wore purty beads, earrings and bracelets, and
wrapped her head up in a red cloth. Her eyes and teeth flashed and she
was always jolly. Sometimes we stay all night, but most de time we come
back home. When she come to see us she always stay all night. All de old
folks had real religion den, and it kept 'em happy. Folks now are too
fancy fer religion and it ain't real. I has real religion and nothing
don't worry me. I feels happy all de time over it.

"My marster give my mother de spot of ground and de lumber fer our
church which was named New Chapel. De second church is on de same spot.
De first preaching was had under a oak tree, or arbor. Uncle Tony Murphy
was de first preacher. He was my favorite of all de preachers. Marse
read de Bible to us, but sometimes others read it to us, too. His son,
Bud, dat was killed in de first battle, used to come to de quarters and
read de Bible to us.

"Alex Hall was de minister dat immersed us all. We was all Methodists,
but out dar dey baptized everybody in de Fairforest no matter what
church dey went to. Dar was fifty people baptized de day dat I was.
Milly Bethane made me a big white robe to be baptized in. When I got out
I had a white dress to put on. Dey had a tent fer us to go in to change
our clothes. We was baptized in de Fairforest jes' above de Harris
Bridge. Everybody sung while we was going under de water. Some of 'em
shouted, too. It took de earthquake to shake religion in my husband. He
was Emanuel Gist, de first one.

"Dat night, de people was hollering and woke me up. My husband called
me. 'What dat?' he 'low. 'I don't know,' I says. He got up and run out.
Soon he come back home and he was shaking all over. He fell on de bed.
When de chimney started to fall, I told him to git up. He said he was
too scared to git up. I pulled him up and he was so scared dat he shook
all over. I opened de door. He was too scared to stand up. Next day he
couldn't work; so he went off. I looked fer him till way in de night.
When he did come home, he was rejoicing. He was wid religion and he
never give it up. Dat was on de night of de earthquake. You could hear
people hollering fer miles around."


  Source: Mary Smith (N, 84), Buffalo St., Union, S.C.
  Interviewer: Caldwell Sims, Union, S.C. (9/14/37)
