James W. Smith, 77, was born a slave of the Hallman family, in
Palestine, Texas. James became a Baptist minister in 1895, and preached
until 1931, when poor health forced him to retire. He and his wife live
at 1306 E. Fourth St., Fort Worth, Texas.*

"Yes, suh, I’m birthed a slave, but never worked as sich, ’cause I’s too
young. But I ’members hearin’ my mother tell all about her slave days
and our master. He was John Hallman and owned a place in Palestine, with
my mother and father and fifty other slaves. My folks was house servants
and lived a little better’n the field hands. De cabins was built cheap,
though, no money, only time for buildin’ am de cost. Dey didn’t use
nails and helt de logs in place by dovetailin’. Dey closed de space
between de logs with wedges covered with mud and straw. De framework for
de door was helt by wooden pegs and so am de benches and tables. Master
Hallman always had some niggers trained for carpenter work, and one to
be blacksmith and one to make shoes and harness.

"We was lucky to have de kind master, what give us plenty to eat. If all
de people now could have jus’ so good food what we had, there wouldn’t
be no beggin’ by hungry folks or need for milk funds for starved babies.

"We didn’t have purty clothes sich as now, with all de dif’rent colors
mixed up, but dey was warm and lastin’, dyed brown and black. De black
oak and cherry made de dyes. Our shoes wasn’t purty, either. I has to
laugh when I think of de shoes. There wasn’t no careful work put on dem,
but dey covered de feets and lasted near forever.

"Master always wanted to help his cullud folks live right and my folks
always said de best time of they lives was on de old plantation. He
always ’ranged for parties and sich. Yes, suh, he wanted dem to have a
good time, but no foolishment, jus’ good, clean fun. There am dancin’
and singin’ mostest every Saturday night. He had a little platform built
for de jiggin’ contests. Cullud folks comes from all round, to see who
could jig de best. Sometimes two niggers each put a cup of water on de
head and see who could jig de hardest without spillin’ any. It was lots
of fun.

"I must tell you ’bout de best contest we ever had. One nigger on our
place was de jigginest fellow ever was. Everyone round tries to git
somebody to best him. He could put de glass of water on his head and
make his feet go like triphammers and sound like de snaredrum. He could
whirl round and sich, all de movement from his hips down. Now it gits
noised round a fellow been found to beat Tom and a contest am ’ranged
for Saturday evenin’. There was a big crowd and money am bet, but master
bets on Tom, of course.

"So dey starts jiggin’. Tom starts easy and a little faster and faster.
The other fellow doin’ de same. Dey gits faster and faster and dat crowd
am a-yellin’. Gosh! There am ’citement. Dey jus’ keep a-gwine. It look
like Tom done found his match, but there am one thing yet he ain’t
done—he ain’t made de whirl. Now he does it. Everyone holds he breath,
and de other fellow starts to make de whirl and he makes it, but jus’ a
spoonful of water sloughs out his cup, so Tom am de winner.

"When freedom come, the master tells his slaves and says, ’What you
gwine do?’ Wall, suh, not one of dem knows dat. De fact am, dey’s scared
dey gwine be put off de place. But master says dey can stay and work for
money or share crop. He says they might be trouble ’twixt de whites and
niggers and likely it be best to stay and not git mixed in dis and dat
org’ization. Mostest stays, only one or two goes away. My folks stays
for five years after de war. Den my father moves to Bertha Creek, where
he done ’range for a farm of his own. They hated to leave master’s
plantation, he’s so good and kind.

"Some the cullud folks thinks they’s to take charge and run the
gov’ment. They asks my father to jine their org’ization. He goes once
and some eggs am served. Dey am served by de crowd and dem eggs ain’t
fresh yard eggs. Father ’cides he wants his eggs served dif’rent, and he
likes dem fresh, so he takes master’s advice and don’t jine nothing.

"When de Klux come, de cullud org’ization made their scatterment. Plenty
gits whipped round our place and some what wasn’t ’titled to it. Den
soldiers comes and puts order in de section. Dey has trouble about
votin’. De cullud folks in dem days was non-knowledge, so how could dey
vote ’telligent? Dat am foolishment to ’sist on de right to vote. It de
non-knowledge what hurts. Myself, I never voted and am too far down de
road now to start.


[Illustration: _James W. Smith_]


"I worked at farmin’ till 1895 when I starts preachin’ in de Baptist
church. I kept that up till 1931, but my health got too bad and I had to
quit. I has de pressure bad. When I preaches, I preaches hard, and de
doctor says dat am danger for me.

"The way I learns to preach am dis: after surrender, I ’tends de school
two terms and den I studies de Bible and I’s a nat’ral talker and gifted
for de Lawd’s work, so I starts preachin’.

"Jennie Goodman and me marries in 1885 and de Lawd never blessed us with
any chillen. We gits de pension, me $16.00 and her $14.00, and gits by
on dat. It am for de rations and de eats, but de clothes am a question!"
