
Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person Interviewed: Henry Smith
                    702 Virginia, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 79
Occupation: Odd jobs


"Yes mam, I was here in slavery times. I was born in Tennessee on a
plantation near Jackson. I was eight years old when peace was declared.
All I member is when they beat the folks pit near to death.

"My old master was Tom Smith. Mean? Cose he was mean. Old mistress was
sorta good to us but old master was the devil. Used to make the men hold
the women while they whipped em. Make em wear old brogan shoes with
buckles across the instep. Had the men and women out fore day plowin'. I
member they had my mother out many a day so dark they had to feel where
the traces was to hitch up the mules.

"My mother worked in the field and I stayed in front and helped her up
when she got behind.

"I member when the Yankees had thousands and thousands of bales of
cotton in the streets right here in Pine Bluff and take a knife and
cut it open and put a match to it, and burn peoples houses and the gin
houses and everything. Take the hosses and mules and run em off.

"Old master and mistress carried us to Texas till peace was declared. I
member one morning the mail come and old master had a long paper and he
called all us colored folks up and told us we was free. He told us we
could go or stay. They all wanted to stay so he brought em all back here
to Arkansas. He give each one three acres of ground and all they could
make on it. That's the nicest thing he ever done, but he didn't do that
but one year. After that the land fell back to him. Then they worked on
the halves.

"When the colored folks went to buy stock and rent land from the whites,
it cost five and six dollars a acre. They sho could make some money that
way, too.

"I was big enough to do right smart behind a plow. I could do a heap. We
got along pretty well.

"I got married when I was bout eighteen and made a home for myself. Me
and my wife had twenty-two children. White folks helped us a lot. My
wife's dead and all my children dead 'cept four.

"I been here in Pine Bluff twenty-two years. I been here a good
while--that ain't no joke. Used to make three dollars a day mowin'
grass. Bought this place with the money. Can't make that now. They won't
give you nothin' for your work.

"Oh yes'm, I voted and wouldn't know what I was votin' till 'twas too
late.

"Never went to school much. Learned to read a little bit. They kep' me
in the field. Yes ma'm, I've worked but I've never had a doctor to me in
my life.

"Ain't much to this younger generation. The old race can get along a lot
better with the white folks than the young race can.

"I'm the head deacon of the Morning Star Church. Read the Bible right
smart. I tell you one thing--I like all of it."
