
Patsy Southwell, 83, was born in Jasper Co., Texas. She has lived on or
near the old plantation all her life. Her master was Bill Trailor.*

"My name Patsy Southwell and I lives at Rock Hill. I been livin’ on dat
plantation all my life, but not allus in the very same place. I think
the house was move and ’nother builded.

"My pappy was John Redd and he ’longed to Bill Trailor and he brung here
from Virginny. Mammy’s name Rose Redd and she a yaller nigger, come from
South Carolina and maybe she white and Indian, too. My brothers call
Dennis, George, William, and Charles and dey all dead.

"We all live in the quarters and massa a tol’able good one 'sidering
others what cut and slashes bad. Pappy and mammy work in the field and
dey send pappy and he sons off six months at the time, over to
Alexandria, to make salt.

"My brothers hunt all the time and brung in deer and wild turkey, so we
has lots to eat. We has butter and milk and honey and pappy allus have
he li’l garden patch.

"We wears slip homespun dress make outten cloth from us loom. I never
have shoes and us has no Sunday clothes. Massa was tol’ably good to the
old folks and not so mean to the chillen. He wasn’t no barbarian like
some what whip the slaves every Monday mornin’ befo’ dey starts to work.

"Massa plantation have fifteen hunnerd acre in it and he didn’t have
'nough slaves so they works awful hard. I seed ’em hit my mammy five
hunnerd licks and my pappy six hunnerd. Pappy have run ’way and been
gone long time and they cotch him in de water in the Neches River. He
have meat and stuff and they say mammy feedin’ him, but I think it the
other way. I think he gittin’ and sendin’ her stuff.

"The white folks has the big church with the bar ’cross it and the
cullud folks sit behin’ the bar. If any wants to jine us tell massa and
he tell the preacher, and he old man Southwell. They baptise at the mill
pond.

"I marries Jerry Southwell and us git marry at home. Jerry wears the
black suit and I wears the dotted white Swiss dress with the overskirt.

"When freedom breaks and massa say we free, we goes to the Haynes’ place
and my pappy farms for hisself. We gits on better den in slavery days
and after ’while pappy buys him some land and den we all right. Me and
my husban’, we stays on with pappy awhile, but we gits our own farm and
farm all us life."
