William Stone was born in a covered wagon, on the way from Alabama to
Texas, about 1863. Though he was too small to remember slave days, he
does recall many things told him by his parents and other ex-slaves.
William lives in Mart, Texas.*

"My parents done told me where I’s borned. It am in a covered wagon on
de way from Alabama to Texas, two years ’fore freedom. Old Marse, Lem
Stone, he left Alabama for Texas, where de war not so bad, and brung
some he slaves with him. He done lost so much in Alabama, Yankees
burnin’ he house and cotton and killin’ he stock, he want to git ’way
from dere.

"First he come to Rusk County, den goes back to Shreveport and stays
till freedom. Pappy and mammy was Louis and Car’line Stone. I lived in
Louisiana till I’s growed.

"Mammy and pappy done told me all ’bout de old plantation. It am
hundreds of acres of land, part worked and part jus’ timber and pasture.
It was near Montgomery, and dey raised more cotton den anything else,
but had some corn and peas and cane. Dey made sorghum and ribbon cane
'lasses and had boilin’ vats for sugar, too.

"De soldiers come through. Dey named, Yankees. Dey make mammy cook
somethin’ to eat and den kilt all de hawgs and took de meat with dem,
and burn de barn and house. Old Marse had pens to put cotton in, hid way
out in de bresh. Dey picked it in gunny sacks and hides it, and slips it
out to de gin by night and tries to sell it ’fore dem Yankees finds it
and burns it.

"Mammy say dey all went to church and had to drive four horses when de
roads muddy in winter and sand deep in summer. Dey allus carry dinner
and stay all day. Den in de evenin’, after de niggers had dey preachin’,
dey all go home. Sometimes a preacher come out to de plantation and hold
church for de white folks in de mornin’ and in de evenin’ for de
niggers, out under a big oak tree.

"De Lawd say iffen us trusts him and help to be good he gwine make our
path straight. Dis was true in de days of den, ’cause our white folks
tooken care of us, befo’ dey was freedom and sech. Now, us gittin’ old,
and gits de old age pension when us too old to work.

"I works all up and down de old river when I’s growed. De plantations
has long staple cotton. Dey raise sugar cane and dere be twenty wagons
haulin’ cane to de boilin’ mills. We was happy to do dat work, ’cause we
knowed it mean us have plenty ’lasses in winter. Lawdy, I wish I knowed
I could have all de ’lasses and bread I wanted dis winter! Dem was good
times, Lawd! Us sing dis song:

    "’We’ll stick to de hoe till de sun go down,
    We’ll rise when de rooster crow,
    And go to de field where de sunshine hot,
    To de field where de sugar cane grow.
    Yes, chilluns, we’ll all go.’

"I can jes’ see dem long rows of cotton and niggers drivin’ de oxen and
mules. I know ’nother song:

    "Nigger mighty happy when he layin’ by de corn,
    Nigger mighty happy when he hear dat dinner horn;
    But he more happy when de night come on,
    Dat’ sun’s a’slantin’, as sho’s you born!
    Dat old cow’s a shakin’ dat great big bell,
    And de frogs tunin’ up, ’cause de dew’s done fell.’

"Dat jes’ after freedom. Dey have plantations and overseers like
slavery, but most de overseers niggers, and dey didn’t whip you den. On
Saturday night de overseer pay us, mostly in rations. He give us five,
maybe ten pounds rations of meat, and a peck or two or meal, and some
coffee and ’lasses.

    "’Dat ration day come once a week,
    Old massa rich as Gundy.
    But he give ’lasses all de week,
    And buttermilk for Sunday.

    "’Old massa give a pound of meat,
    I et it all on Monday;
    Den I et ’lasses all de week,
    And buttermilk for Sunday.’

"All dis was down on de Mississippi bottom. Old Man River was sho’ purty
in de fall, when dem wild geeses come in droves and de blossoms red and
yaller. De fogs come hang over and chills and fever gits started. De
woman sot by de fire piecin’ quilts and spinnin’ thread, and de old men
weave cotton baskets and chair bottoms, and de young men work on da
levees, so dey hold Old Man River back when he start prowlin’ round
'gain.


[Illustration: _William Stone_]


"Floods come down, no matter what time of year. One day Old Man River be
runnin’ ’long, jes’ as peaceful and quiet, and everybody happy.
Everybody meet de boats at de landin’. Den way in de night you wake up
and hear a roarin’ like thunder and dat river be on a tear. Folks know
he am in de ugly mood, and starts movin’ to higher ground. Everybody
what have a wagon and mule gits out. Some jes’ gits to de levee. It look
like my folks told me when dey run from de Yankees, only dis time it’s
de river. Old Man River sho’ treach’ous. After he go on one he rarin’
and tearin’ spells, den he gwine be so peaceful and quiet like. Look
like he try to make up for he meanness.

"I gits married and moves clost to de Trinity River, and stays till my
family done raised. Dey has free schools in Texas den. I works in de
sawmill and dere so much wild game us can eat easy. Dem days on de
Mississippi bottom is like a dream, but when I hears talk ’bout Old Man
River, I can dem big waters roarin’ down."
