The subject of this sketch is Edward Taylor, exact age not known, but he
is positive he is over 115 years old. He lives in a two room frame
cottage in the rear of 8013 Dale Avenue, St. Louis County, Missouri,
with his wife of less than twelve months and says she is in her 50’s.

Taylor is a tall, slender, almost erect old man, looks well for his age,
very hard of hearing, his hair well mingled with gray. He believes God
has called him to preach holiness to the world, and it is a hard matter
to keep his mind on an interview for his ex-slave experiences instead of
preaching to his interviewer. His story follows:

"I was born in Cheneyville, Louisiana. I guess around 1812. But I don’t
know. I do know, I was owned by Marse William Chaney. He was a rich old
slave owner. I thought in dem days white folks was God, didn’t know no
better.

"I ’member well when de stars fell, I saw ’em twixt midnight and day and
tried to ketch some of ’em. I was grown, too, most. I wasn’t scared
'cause I thought long as I staid where de white folks was, dey would
protect me from all harm, even de stars in de elements, storms, or what
not, just stay near de white folks and I had nothing to worry about. I
thought white folks made de stars, sun and everything on de earth. I
knowed nothing but to be driven and beat all de time. I seed em take de
bottom rail out of de rail fences and stick de nigger’s head in de hole
den jam de balance of de fence down on his neck, and beat him till he’s
stiff. Den I seed ’em put 40 or 50 slaves in stock and as high as 300 at
a time and punish ’em, till some of ’em died. It was terrible. Chaney
done his slaves so bad when he taken down sick, he just suffered till de
skin dropped off his bones. Nobody do any thing for him but me,
everybody, even his own folks was scared of him, didn’t want to touch
him he looked and smelt so bad. But I just stuck hard by him till he
died. I took care of Jeff Davis for years, long fore he ever got
president of des United States. Yes sir, I did. When de stars fell
people all runnin’ and hollerin’ judgment done come. I didn’t see no
need in all dat ’citement, as long as de white folks livin’ I thought
they could keep us niggers livin’.

"I used to hear de white folks readin’ de paper ’bout de war, and
readin’ de Yankees beaten ’em, and I wondered what de world is Yankees.
I thought dey talking ’bout birds of de air or sumpin’. After while
Essex Gun Boat got all de South to Vicksburg. I found out den what
Yankees was. Yes, sir, I did. My slave owners would make de blacksmith
make buck horns and fasten ’em like a crown on de slave women’s heads
and brad ’em on dere so dey would know ’em by dat mark. Dey was so tight
and heavy for dem women to carry around dey often times swell up dere
head so dey couldn’t hardly see out dere eyes.

"I worked naked most my time I didn’t know nothing ’bout pride. Dey had
looms some places to make hemp coats and jackets. I had to make rails,
drive wagons, and make cross tires in a blacksmith shop. We had to have
a pass to go any place. De patrollers would git us and make us show our
pass, and we got to be in our cabin by 9 o’clock. I got one pound of fat
meat a week. If you got sick de doctor tell you to not lie to the old
Marse or old Miss and you git all right. After de war was over I had to
cut two cords of wood at night and work all day for one penny, and we
could buy a ginger cake long as I was tall nearly and it last us all
week. You could git it for a penny and we called it a stage plank. It
was long and thin. I never kin forgit when old Marse William Chaney
died. We fell to his brother Marse George Chaney. De wife I married
belonged to de same people owned me. Marse George chained a host of dem
niggers together and sold ’em, and bought some more. He bought four wid
my wife at one time but he sold ’em in droves. Marse William owned us by
de hundreds. I ’member I was 30 years old when I married. My wife had
two chillin but dey dead long ago. I don’t know how old my wife was when
I married her though. I know dis here wife I got now since she was a
baby. We jes’ been married less dan a year. I am de first colored man to
own a piece a ground in Lincoln Terrace, and de oldest man, white or
black, to ever apply for a marriage license in the State of Missouri. I
owns dis whole block from Dale to Harter Avenue and am taking care of
four families living on my property, dat don’t pay me a penny, and
haven’t for years. I never been to school a day in my life. Just
trustin’ God for my gittin along, and my understandin’. An automobile
run over me two years ago and I had another accident in Jefferson City,
Missouri one year ago, but am still able to go and preach the word of
God.
