Foreword:—In Uncle Daniel Taylor we find the unusual, fast disappearing
type of negro ex-slave (it makes the sentimental white man feel a deep
sadness in the passing of these gentle old souls, whose lives have been
well spent in serving to the best of their ability.) Uncle Dan is a
light complected mulatto (octoroon) with a high and broad forehead (a
noble brow) devoid of all negroid features, a heavy suit of silk-like
hair almost free of any kinks, a heavy suit of gray beard (it is in the
short kinky hair next to his throat that the negro stands out most
prominently) a fine moustache which matches the snowy silkiness of his
hair up on his head. Deep set, dark blue-grey eyes which beam with
kindliness, wide apart and far-searching. A voice well modulated and
refined in timbre, of tenor quality. Uncle Dan has been so closely
associated with the educated white man of the South until he uses no
negro dialect, but his speech is that of one who has tried at all times
to speak correctly and deliberately. He has served as janitor at nearly
all of the Public Schools of the Montgomery City Schools system, and for
fifteen years or more has been at the Baldwin High School; is janitor at
this school at present (May 1937) where he is highly respected, and
greatly beloved by the student body and members of the large faculty.

"Strange to say, I do not remember the name of my first master, nor of
the second master to whom my Mother and myself were sold to in Alabama.
I was born at Charleston, South Carolina, and at the age of two and a
half years we landed at Luverne, Ala., where with my Mother I was sold
for four-hundred dollars.

"I was fourteen years old at the time of the ’Surrender,’ and was living
at old ’Rocky Mount’ in Crenshaw County, at the time of the ’Civil War.’
Professor Mack Barnes of Highland Home, Alabama, was the first man I
ever worked for, and he, as you know, was at the head of the large
school located in Highland Home.

"The hottest moments of my life were the ones in which my Mother got
tight in behind me with a hickory (switch) and I always took to the
woods. I’ll just bet that I knew and could tell more about the woods and
the cane-brake than anyone in that section. Yes sir! I knew every
varmint that crawled on its belly, and all the rest which went on four
feet, that lived there. Believe me, I knew every one of them by name and
right where they stayed.

"The hot moments just mentioned usually found me ’cooling off’ in the
creek in the old swimmin’ hole.

[Illustration: _Daniel Taylor, Montgomery, Alabama_]

"Among the thrilling moments of my life well do I remember the visits of
President Jefferson Davis, (the first and only President of the
Confederate States of America) to the home of my Master. Mr. Davis
always gave me a quarter of a dollar for holding his horse, and up ’til
lately I had one of those quarters as a highly valued keep-sake, but it
suddenly disappeared, I know not where.

"The most exciting moments of my whole life was when the Herron Street
School (at present the Cottage Hill School) caught fire and burned to
the ground. We had marched all of the children out of the building to
safety (you see we had all had disciplined fire drills) but Professor
Charles L. Floyd (Superintendent of the Montgomery Public Schools) was
mindful lest there should still be one person left in the building, so
hastened back into the rapidly burning building. He just wouldn’t listen
to the pleadings of Miss Jinny (Miss Virginia Hereford, who was the
Principal of this school) nor to Miss Sophy (Miss Sophia Holmes) a
teacher at the primary department, nor would he listen to my humble
plea. The roof was already tumbling in, and the blazing rafters were
falling in every direction. I could stand it no longer, so rushed right
through the smoke and flames, finally I found Mr. Floyd and dragged him
out to safety. My God! I loved that white man, he was one of the finest
men I ever knew!

"No! Mister John, I have never sought a ’heroe’s medal for bravery and
for risking my life’, my one great reward was in the saving of the life
of my true friend Professor Charles L. Floyd."



