


My name is George Thompson, I was born in Monroe County, Kentucky near
the Cumberland river Oct. 8, 1854, on the Manfred Furgeson plantation,
who owned about 50 slaves. Mister Furgerson [TR: before, Furgeson] was a
preacher and had three daughters and was kind to his slaves.

I was quite a small boy when our family, which included an older
sister, was sold to Ed. Thompson in Medcalf Co. Kentucky, who owned
about 50 other slaves, and as was the custom then we was given the name
of our new master, "Thompson".

I was hardly twelve years old when slavery was abolished, yet I can
remember at this late date most of the happenings as they existed at
that time.

I was so young and unexperienced when freed I remained on the Thompson
plantation for four years after the war and worked for my board and
clothes as coach boy and any other odd jobs around the plantation.

I have no education, I can neither read nor write, as a slave I was not
allowed to have books. On Sundays I would go into the woods and gather
ginseng which I would sell to the doctors for from 10¢ to 15¢ a pound
and with this money I would buy a book that was called the Blue Back
Speller. Our master would not allow us to have any books and when we
were lucky enough to own a book we would have to keep it hid, for if our
master would find us with a book he would whip us and take the book from
us. After receiving three severe whippings I gave up and never again
tried for any learning, and to this day I can neither read nor write.

Slaves were never allowed off of their plantation without a written
pass, and if caught away from their plantation without a pass by the
Pady-Rollers or Gorillars (who were a band of ruffians) they wore
whipped.

As there were no oil lamps or candles, another black boy and myself
were stationed at the dining table to hold grease lamps for the white
folks to see to eat. And we would use brushes to shoo away the flies.

In 1869 I left the plantation to go on my own. I landed in Heart County,
Ky. and went to work for Mr. George Parish in the tobacco fields at
$25.00 per year and two suits of clothes; after working two years for
Mr. Parish I left. I drifted from place to place in Alabama and
Mississippi, working first at one place and then another, and finally
drifted into Franklin in 1912 and went to work on the Fred Murry farm on
Hurricane road for 10 years. I afterwards worked for Ashy Furgerson, a
house mover.

I have lived at my present address, 651 North Young St. since coming to
Franklin.

(Can furnish photograph if wanted) [TR: no photograph found.]
