


"I am 83 years old. My mother come from Georgia. She left all her kin.
Our owner was Dave and Luiza Johnson. They had two girls and a
boy--Meely, Colly and Tobe. My mother's aunt come to Memphis in slavery
time and come to see us. She cooked and bought herself free. The folks
what owned her hired her out till they got paid her worth. She died in
Memphis. I never heard father say where he come from or who owned him.
He lived close by somewhere.

"My mother cooked. Me and Dave Johnson's boy nursed together. When they
had company, Miss Luiza was so modest she wouldn't let Tobe have
'titty'. He would come lead my mother behind the door and pull at her
till she would take him and let him nurse. She said he would lead her
behind the door.

"I don't remember freedom. I know the Ku Klux was bad around Augusta,
Arkansas. One time when I was little a crowd of Ku Klux come at about
dusk. They told Dave Johnson they wanted water. He told them there was a
well full but not bother that woman and her children in the kitchen.
Dave Johnson was a Ku Klux himself. They went on down the road and met a
colored woman. She knowed their horses. She called some of them by name
and they let her alone.

"One time a colored man was settin' by the fire. His wife was sick in
bed. He seen the Ku Klux coming and said 'Lord God, here comes the
devil.' He run off. They didn't bother her. She told them she was sick.
When she got up and well she wouldn't live with that husband no more.

"Up at Bowens Ridge they took some colored men out one night and if they
said they was Republicans they let them go but if they said they was
Democrats they whooped them so hard they nearly killed some of them.
Some said they was bushwhackers or carpet baggers and not Ku Klux.

"I am a country-raised woman. I had a light stroke and cain't work in
the field. I get $8.00 and commodities. I like to live here very well. I
don't meddle with young folks business. Seems like they do mighty
foolish things to me. Times been changing ever since I come in this
world. It is the people cause the times to change. I wouldn't know how
to start to vote."
