


Charlie Vaden's father ran away and went to the war to fight. He was a
slave and left his owner. His mother died when he was five years old but
before she died she gave Charlie to Mrs. Frances Owens (white lady). She
came to Des Arc and ran the City Hotel. He never saw his father till he
was grown. He worked for Mrs. Owens. He never did run with colored folks
then. He nursed her grandchildren, Guy and Ira Brown. When he was grown
he bought a farm at Green Grove. It consisted of a house and forty-seven
acres of land. He farmed two years. A fortune teller came along and told
him he was going to marry but he better be careful that they wouldn't
live together or he might "drop out." He went ahead and married like he
was "fixing" to do. They just couldn't get along, so they got divorced.

They had the wedding at her house and preacher Isarel Thomas (colored)
married them and they went on to his house. He don't remember how she
was dressed except in white and he had a "new outfit too."

Next he married Lorine Rogers at the Green Grove Church and took her
home. She fell off the porch with a tub of clothes and died from it just
about a year after they married.

He married again at the church and lived with her twenty years. They had
four girls and four boys. She died from the change of life.

The last wife he didn't live with either. She is still living.

Had another fortune teller tell his fortune. She said, "Uncle, you are
pretty good but be careful or you'll be walking around begging for
victuals." He said it had nearly come to that now except it hurt him to
walk. (He can hardly walk.) He believes some of what the fortune tellers
tell comes true. He has been on the same farm since 1887, which is
forty-nine years, and did fine till four years ago. He can't work,
couldn't pay taxes, and has lost his land.

He was paralized five months, helpless as a baby, couldn't dress
himself. An herb doctor settled at Green Grove and used herbs for tea
and poultices and cured him. The doctors and the law run him out of
there. His name was Hopkins from Popular Bluff, Missouri.

Charlie Vaden used to have rheumatism and he carried a buckeye in each
pants pocket to make the rheumatism lighter. He thought it did some
good.

He has a birthmark. Said his mother must have craved pig tails. He never
had enough pig tails to eat in his life. The butchers give them to him
when he comes to Hazen or Des Arc. He said he would "fight a circle saw
for a pig tail."

He can't remember any old songs or old tales. In fact he was too small
when his mother died (five years old).

He believes in herb medicine of all kinds but can't remember except
garlic poultice is good for neuralgia. Sassafras is a good tea, a good
blood purifier in the spring of the year.

He knows a weather sign that seldom or never falls. "Thunder in the
morning, rain before noon." "Seldom rains at night in July in Arkansas."

He has seen lots of lucky things but doesn't remember them. "It's bad
luck to carry hoes and rakes in the living house." "It's bad luck to spy
the new moon through bushes or trees."

He doesn't believe in witches, but he believes in spirits that direct
your course as long as you are good and do right. He goes to church all
the time if they have preaching. Green Grove is a Baptist church. He is
not afraid of dead people. "They can't hurt you if they are dead."
