


"My mother was named Isabel Porter Smith. She come from Springville.
Rev. Porter brought her to Mississippi close to Holly Springs. Then she
come to Batesville, Arkansas. He owned her. He was a circuit rider. I
think he was a Presbyterian minister. I heard her say they brought her
to Arkansas when she was a small girl. She nursed and cooked all the
time. After freedom she went with Reverend Porter's relatives to work
for them. I know so very little about what she said about slavery.

"My father was raised in North Carolina. His name was Jerry Smith and
his master he called Judge Smith. My father made all he ever had
farmin'. He knew how to raise cotton. He owned a home. This is his home
(a nice home on River Street in Clarendon) and 80 acres. He sold this
farm two miles from here after he had paralysis, to live on.

"My parents had two girls and two boys. They all dead but me. My
mother's favorite song was "Oh How I Love Jesus Because He First Loved
Me." They come here because my mother had a brother down here and she
heard it was such fine farmin' land.

"When I was a little girl my father was a Presbyterian so he sent me to
boardin' school in Cotton Plant and then sent me to Jacksonville,
Illinois. I worked my board out up there. Mrs. Dr. Carroll got me a
place to work. My sister learned to sew. She sewed for the public till
her death. She sewed for both black and white folks. I stretches
curtains now if I can get any to stretch and I irons. It give me
rheumatism to wash. I used to wash and iron.

"My husband cooks on a Government derrick boat. He gets $1.25 and his
board. They have the very best things to eat. He likes the work if he
can stay well. He can cook pies and fancy cookin'. They like that. Say
they can't hardly get somebody work long because they want to be in town
every night.

"We have one child. I used to be a primary teacher here at Clarendon.

"I never have voted. My husband votes but I don't know what he thinks
about it.

"I try to look at the present conditions in an encouraging way. The
young people are so extravagant. The old folks in need. The thing most
discouraging is the strangers come in and get jobs home folks could do
and need and they can't get jobs and got no money to leave on nor no
place to go. People that able to work don't work hard as they ought and
people could and willin' to work can't get jobs. Some of the young folks
do sure live wild lives. They think only of the present times. A few
young folks are buying homes but not half of them got a home. They work
where they let 'em have a room or a house. Different folks live all
kinds of ways."
