


"I was born in Huntsville, Alabama. My mother brought me from there when
I was five years old. She said she would come to Arkansas because she
had heard so much talk about it. But when she struck the Arkansas line,
she didn't like it and she wanted to go back. I have heard her say why
but I don't remember now; I done forgot. She thought she wouldn't like
it here, but she did after she stayed a while.

"My bronchial tubes git all stopped up and make it hard for me to talk.
Phlegm gits all around. I been bothered with them a good while now.

"My mother, she was sold from her father when she was four years old.
The rest of the children were grown then. Master Hickman was the one who
bought her. I don't know the one that sold her. Hickman had a lot of
children her age and he raised her up with them. They were nice to her
all the time.

"Once the pateroles came near capturing her. But she made it home and
they didn't catch her.

"Mr. Candle hired her from her master when she was about eighteen years
old. He was nice to her but his wife was mean. Just because mother
wouldn't do everything the other servants said Mis' Candle wanted to
whip her. Mother said she knew that Mis' Candle couldn't whip her alone.
But she was 'fraid that she would have Sallie, another old Negro woman
slave, and Kitty, a young Negro woman slave, to help whip her.

"One day when it was freezing cold, she wanted mother to stand out in
the hall with Sallie and Clara and wash the glasses in boiling hot
water. She was making her do that because she thought she was uppity and
she wanted to punish her. When mother went out, she rattled the dishes
'round in the pan and broke them. They was all glasses. Mis' Candle
heard them breaking and come out to see about it. She wanted to whip
mother but she was 'fraid to do it while she was alone; so she waited
till her husband come home. When he come she told him. He said she
oughtn't to have sent them out in the cold to wash the glasses because
nobody could wash dishes outside in that cold weather.

"The first morning she was at Mis' Candle's, they called her to eat and
they didn't have nothing but black molasses and corn bread for mother's
meal. The other two ate it but mother didn't. She asked for something
else. She said she wasn't used to eating that--that she ate what her
master and mistress ate at home.

"Mis' Candle didn't like that to begin with. She told my mother that she
was a smart nigger. She told mother to do one thing and then before she
could do it, she would tell her do something else. Mother would just go
on doing the first thing till she finished that, and Mis' Candle would
git mad. But it wasn't nobody's fault but her own.

"She asked mother to go out and git water from the spring on a rainy
day. Mother wouldn't go. Finally mother got tired and went back home.
Her mistress heard what she had to tell her about the place she'd been
working. Then she said mother did right to quit. She had worked there
for three or four months. They meant to keep her but she wouldn't stay.
Mis' Hickman went over and collected her money.

"When mother worked out, the people that hired her paid her owners. Her
owners furnished her everything she wanted to eat and clothes to wear,
and all the money she earned went to them.

"Mis' Candle begged Mr. Hickman to let him have mother back. He said
he'd talk to his wife and she wouldn't mistreat her any more but mama
said that she didn't want to go back and Mrs. Hickman said, 'No, she
doesn't want to go back and I wouldn't make her.' And the girls said,
'No, mama, don't let her go back.' And Mis' Hickman said, 'No, she was
raised with my girls and I am not going to let her go back.'

"The Hickmans had my mother ever since she was four years old. My
grandfather was allowed to go a certain distance with her when she was
sold away from him. He walked and carried her in his arms. Mama said
that when he had gone as far as they would let him go, he put her in the
wagon and turned his head away. She said she wondered why he didn't look
at her; but later she understood that he hated so bad to 'part from her
and couldn't do nothing to prevent it that he couldn't bear to look at
her.

"Since I have been grown I have worked with some people at Newport. I
stayed with them there and married there, and had all my children there.

"I heard the woman I lived with, a woman named Diana Wagner, tell how
her mistress said, 'Come on, Diana, I want you to go with me down the
road a piece.' And she went with her and they got to a place where there
was a whole lot of people. They were putting them up on a block and
selling them just like cattle. She had a little nursing baby at home and
she broke away from her mistress and them and said, 'I can't go off and
leave my baby.' And they had to git some men and throw her down and hold
her to keep her from goin' back to the house. They sold her away from
her baby boy. They didn't let her go back to see him again. But she
heard from him after he became a young man. Some one of her friends that
knowed her and knowed she was sold away from her baby met up with this
boy and got to questioning him about his mother. The white folks had
told him his mother's name and all. He told them and they said, 'Boy, I
know your mother. She's down in Newport.' And he said, 'Gimme her
address and I'll write to her and see if I can hear from her.' And he
wrote. And the white people said they heard such a hollering and
shouting goin' on they said, 'What's the matter with Diana?' And they
came over to see what was happening. And she said, 'I got a letter from
my boy that was sold from me when he was a nursing baby.' She had me
write a letter to him. I did all her writing for her and he came to see
her. I didn't get to see him. I was away when he come. She said she was
willing to die that the Lord let her live to see her baby again and had
taken care of him through all these years.

"My father's name was Peter Warren and my mother was named Adelaide
Warren. Before she was married she went by her owner's name, Hickman. My
daddy belonged to the Phillips but he didn't go in their name. He went
in the Warren's name. He did that because he liked them. Phillips was
his real father, but he sold him to the Warrens and he took their name
and kept it. They treated him nice and he just stayed on in their name.
He didn't marry till after both of them were free. He met her somewheres
away from the Hickman's. They married in Alabama.

"Mama was born and mostly reared in Virginia and then come to Alabama.
That's where I was born, in Alabama. And they left there and came here.
I was four years old when they come here.

"I never did hear what my father did in slavery time. He was a twin. The
most he took notice of he said was his brother and him settin' on an old
three-legged stool. And his mother had left some soft soap on the fire.
His brother saw that the pot was goin' to turn over and he jumped up. My
father tried to get up too but the stool turned over and caught him,
caught his little dress and held him and the hot soap ran over his dress
and on to his bare skin. It left a big burn on his side long as he
lived. His mother was there close to the house because she knowed the
soap was on and those two little boys were in there. She heard him
crying and ran in and carried him to her master. He got the doctor and
saved him. My father's mother didn't do nothing after that but 'tend to
that baby. Her master loved those little boys and kept her and _didn't
sell her because of them_. (The underscoring is the interviewer's--ed.)
That was his last master--Warren. Warren loved him more than his real
father did. Warren said he knew my father would never live after he had
such a burn. But he did live. They never did let him do much work after
the accident.

"I think my father's master, Warren--I can't remember his first
name--farmed for a living.

"My father and mother had five children. I don't know how many brothers
my father had. I have heard my mother say she had four sisters. I never
heard her say nothin' 'bout no brothers--just sisters.

"I had six children. Got three living and three dead. They was grown
though when they died. I had three boys and three girls. I got two boys
living and one girl. The boy in St. Louis does pretty well. But the
other in Little Rock doesn't have much luck. If he'd get out of Little
Rock, he would find more to do. The one in St. Louis don't make much now
because they done cut wages. He's a dining-car waiter. This girl what's
here, she does all she can for me. She has a husband and my husband is
dead. He's been dead a long time.

"I belong to Bethel A.M.E. Church. You know where that is. Rev. Campbell
is a good man. We had him eight years. Then we got Brother Wilson one
year and then they put Campbell back.

"I don't know what to think of these young people. Some of them is
running wild.

"When I was working for myself, I was generally a maid. But that is been
a long time ago. I washed and ironed and done laundry work when I was
able a long time ago. But I can't do it now. I can't do it for myself
now. I washed for myself a little and I got the flu and got in bad
health. That was about four years ago. I reckon it was the flu; I never
did have no doctor. When I take the least little cold, it comes back on
me."


Interviewer's Comment

This old lady appears nearer eighty than sixty-nine, and she speaks with
the sureness of an eyewitness.
