


"I was born seven or eight miles from Hernando, Mississippi. My pa was a
slave over twenty years. He belong to Master Will Walker, and his white
mistress was Ann. They brought him from 'round Athens, Georgia. He was
heired through his master. His own mother died at his birth and he was
the son of a peddler through the country. He was a furriner but pa never
could tell. His young master never told him. His ma was the nurse about
the place. The peddler was a white man of some kind. He kept coming
about selling goods. The dogs made a bad racket. They never bought
nothing much. Old master suspicioned him trying to get away with
something about the place. He come right out and accused him to being up
to something. He denied it. He told the peddler not to come back. He
never. After it was over she told her mistress. He wanted her to go on
off with him. That made them mad. But he never was seen about there.

"When Will Walker got married he wanted my pa and he was give to him, a
horse and buggy, two mules, a lamb, and five young cows. He had some
money and he come to Mississippi. I reckon he did buy some land. He got
to be a slave owner before freedom. Pa said he drove the horse to the
buggy and his master rode a mule, led a mule and brought his cows, and
they kept the lamb in the buggy with them nearly all the way.

"I think they was good to him. His young mistress cried so much they all
went back once before freedom. They went on Christmas time. Only time he
ever was drunk. He got down and nearly froze to death. The white folks
heard he was somewhere down. They went and got him one Sunday morning in
a two-horse wagon. He was nearly dead. That was his first and last
spree.

"Pa said he nursed three of his young mistress' babies, Alfred, Tom, and
Kenneth.

"After freedom pa went to Texas with Alfred Walker. He owned a ranch out
on the desert and raised Texas ponies and big horn cows. They sent a
carload of young cattle to St. Louis and pa stopped back in Mississippi
and married ma. She was a Walker too, Libbie Walker. There was fourteen
of us children. They nearly all went to Louisiana to work in the timber.
I come to Clarendon. I been married three times. My last wife left me
and took my onliest child. Only child I ever had. They was at Hot
Springs last account I had of them. She was cooking for a woman over
there. My girl is up 'bout grown now. She come to Clarendon to see me
three years ago. I sent for her but she wouldn't stay. She writes to me,
but I have to get somebody to write for me and somebody to read her
letters. I can read print real good. I never went to school a day in my
whole life. We had to work early and late when I come up.

"I farmed, sawmilled, worked in the timber. I do public work, haul wood,
cut wood, and work in the field by day labor.

"I votes a Republican ticket. I haven't voted since Mr. Taft run. I
don't have no way to keep up with elections now. Folks used to talk
more, now they keeps quiet.

"I never heard pa say how he come to know about freedom. Ma said she was
refugeed to Texas and when they brung them back, Master Will Walker met
them at the creek on his place and he said, 'You all are free now. You
can go on my place or hunt other places.' They went on his place and
they lived there a long time. I don't remember ever living on that
place. Pa wasn't there then. I don't know where be could been. Ma and pa
was both Walkers but no blood kin. Ma didn't talk much about old times.
She was sold once, she said. Bass Kelly bought her. I don't know if Will
Walker traded for her. She never did say. Bass Kelly was mean to her. He
beat her and one time she hid and kept hid till she nearly starved, she
said. She hid in the corn crib. It was a log house. She didn't enjoy
slavery. Pa had a very good time, better than us boys had it when we
come up. He worked and kept us with him. He and ma died the same week.
They had pneumonia in Mississippi.

"I got one sister. She lives close to Shreveport. She keeps up with us
all. I go down there every now and then. She's not stove up like I am.
She wants me to stay with her all the time. I gets work down there
easier but I have the rheumatism bad down there.

"I don't know what will become of young folks. I wish I had their
chance. They can't wait for nothing. They in too big a hurry for the
crop to grow. Busy living by the day. When the year gone they ain't no
better off. Times is good in places. Hard in places. Times better in
Louisiana than up here. Work easier to get. Folks got more living.

"I'm chopping cotton on Mr. Hill's place. I gets ninety cents a day. I
can't get over the ground fast."
