


"My mother was a slave and my father too I recken. They belonged to Jack
Walton when I remembered. I was born at St. Charles. My mother died in
time of the war at St. Louis. This is whut I remembers. My mother was
sold twice. The Prices owned her and the Wakefields owned her before she
was owned by old Jack Walton. I was the youngest child. I had one
brother went to war and he drawed a pension long as he lived. We
children all got scattered out. Mr. Walton bout the age of my father and
he said some day all these niggers be set free and warnt long fore they
sho was. I had one older sister I recollect mighty well. My mother named
Fannie, my father named Abe Walton. He had a young master James Walton.

"When I was nuthin but a chile I remembers James dressed up like Ku Klux
Klan and scared me. The old master sho did whoop him bout that. They
take care of the little black children and feed em good an don't let em
do too hard er work to stunt em so they take em off and sell em for a
good price.

"I remembers the little old log house my granma and granpa way back over
on the place stayed in till they died. We went back after the war and
lived ten years on the same place. We lived close to the white folks in
a bigger house.

"I don't recollect no big change after freedom cept they quit selling
and working folks without giving them money. I was too small to notice
much change then I speck. Times has always been tight wid me. I ain't
never had very much. I did work an a livin is all I ever got out of it.
Never could make enough to get ahead.

"The white folks never give the darky nothing when freedom declared. We
used to raise tobacco and sell it to smoke and make snuff. And he had em
make ax handles to sell on the side for money till the crops gathered.

"If you believe in the Bible you won't believe in women votin' I never
did vote. I ain't goner never vote.

"The present condition is fine. Mrs. Robinson carries a great big truck
load to her farm every day to pick cotton. She sent word up here she
take anybody whut wanter work. I wish I was able to go. I loves to pick
cotton. She pay em seventy-five cents a hundred. She'll pay em too! I
don't know what they do this winter. Set by the fire I recken. But next
spring she'll let hoe that crop. She took em this past year to hoe out
that very cotton they pickin now. Her husband, he's sick. He keeps their
store up town. She takes a few white hands too if they wanter work. I
don't think the present generation no worse en they ever been. They
drawed up closer together than they used to be. They buys everything now
an they don't raise nuthin. It's the Bible fulfillin. Everything so high
they caint save nuthin!

"I married twice. First time in the church, other time at home. I had
four children. I had two in Detroit. I don't know where my son is. He
may be there yet. My daughter there got fourteen children her own. I
don't know where the others are. Nom [HW: long "o" diacritical] they
don't help me a bit, do well helpin theirselves. I gets the Welfare
sistance and I works my garden back here."
