



"I was born in 1852--born in Arkansas. Sam Warren was my old master.

"I remember some of the Rebel generals--General Price and General
Marmaduke.

"We had started to Texas but the Yankees got in ahead of us in the
Saline bottoms and we couldn't go no further.

"My boss had so much faith in his own folks he wouldn't leave here 'til
it was too late. He left home on Saturday night and got into the bottoms
on Sunday and made camp. Then the Yankees got in ahead of him and he
couldn't go no further, so we come back to Jefferson County.

"The Yankees had done took Little Rock and come down to Pine Bluff.

"My father died in 1860 and my mother in 1865.

"I can remember when they whipped the slaves. Never whipped me
though--they was just trainin' me up.

"Had an old lady on the place cooked for the children and we just got
what we could.

"I remember when peace was declared, the people shouted and rejoiced--a
heavy load had fell off.

"All the old hands stayed on the place. I stayed there with my uncle and
aunt. We was treated better then. I was about 25 years old when I left
there.

"I farmed 'til '87. Then I joined the Conference and preached nearly
forty years when I was superannuated.

"I remember when the Rebels was camped up there on my boss's place. I
used to love to see the soldiers. Used to see the horses hitched to the
artillery.

"Two or three of Sam Warren's hands run off and joined the Yankees. They
didn't know what it was goin' to be and two of 'em come back--stayed
there too.

"I used to vote the Republican ticket. I was justice of the peace four
years--two terms.

"I went to school here in Pine Bluff about two or three terms and I was
school director in district number two about six or seven years.

"I have great hope for the young people of the future. 'Course some of
'em are not worth killin' but the better class--I think there is a
bright future for 'em.

"But for the world in general, if they don't change they goin' to the
devil. But God always goin' to have some good people in reserve 'til the
Judgment."
