


The first thing I remember was living with my mother about six miles
from Scott's Crossing in Arkansas, about the year 1866. I know it was
1866 because it was the year after the surrender, and we know the
surrender was in 1865. I know the dates after 1866. You don't know
nothin' when you don't know dates. If you get up in court and say
somethin', the lawyers ask you when it happened and then they ask you
where did it happen, and if you can't tell them, they say "Witness is
excused. You don't know nothin'."


Mother and Father

My mother was born in North Carolina in Mecklinberg in Henderson County.
I don't know when she came to Arkansas, and I don't know when she went
to Tennessee.

My father was born in Tennessee. I don't know the county like I did in
North Carolina. I don't know the town either, but I think it was in the
rurals somewhere. The white folks separated my mother and father when I
was a little baby in their arms. The people to whom my father belonged
stayed in Tennessee, but my mother's people came to Arkansas. It must
have been along in the time of the war that they come to Arkansas.


Dwelling

My mother lived in a log house chinked with wood chinks. The chinks
looked like gluts. You know what a glut is? No? Well a glut looks like
the pattern of a shoe. They lay the logs together, and then chink up the
cracks with wood blocks made up like the pattern of a shoe. These were
chinks, wooden things about a foot long, shaped like a wedge. They were
used for chinking. After the logs were laid together, chinks would be
needed to stop up the holes between the logs. After the chinking was
finished, clay was stuffed in to stop up the cracks and make the house
warm. I've seen a many a one built.

Wide planks were used for the floors. The doors were hung on wooden
hinges. The doors were never locked. They didn't have any looks on them.
You could bar them on the inside if you wanted to. They didn't have no
fear of burglars in them days. People wasn't bad then as they is now.
They had just one window and one door in the house. The chimney was
built up like a ladder and clay and straw was stuffed in the framework.

I have seen such houses built right down here in Scott's. My mother was
a field hand. She lived in such a house in Tennessee. There wasn't no
brick about the house, not even in the chimney. In later years, they
have covered up all those logs with weather boards and made the houses
look like what they call "modern", but theyr'e the same old log houses.


Food

My mother said her white folks fed her well. She had whatever they had.
When she came to Arkansas, they issued rations, but she never was issued
rations before. When they issued rations, they gave them so much food
each week--so much corn meal, so much potatoes, so much cabbage, so much
molasses, so much meat--mostly rubbish-like food. We went out in the
garden and dug the potatoes and got the cabbage.

But in Tennessee, my mother got what ever she wanted whenever she wanted
it. If she wanted salt, she went and got it. If she wanted meat, she
went to the smokehouse and got it. Whatever she wanted, she went and got
it, and they didn't have no times for issuing out.


Social Affairs--Corn Shuckings, Quiltings and Dances

The biggest time I remember on the plantations was corn shucking time.
Plenty of corn was brought in from the cribs and strowed along where
everybody could get to it freely. Then they would all get corn and shuck
it until near time to quit. The corn shucking was always at night, and
only as much corn as they thought would be shucked was brought from the
cribs. Just before they got through, they would begin to sing. Some of
the songs were pitiful and sad. I can't remember any of them, but I can
remember that they were sad. One of them began like this:

  "The speculator bought my wife and child
   And carried her clear away."

When they got through shucking, they would hunt up the boss. He would
run away and hide just before. If they found him, two big men would take
him up on their shoulders and carry him all around the grounds while
they sang. My mother told me that they used to do it that way in slave
time.


Dances

They didn't dance then like they do now all hugged up and indecent. In
them days, they danced what you call square dances. They don't do those
dances now, they're too decent. There were eight on a set. I used to
dance those myself.


Quiltings

I heard mother say she went to a lot of quiltings. I suppose they had
them much the same as they do now. Everybody took a part of the quilt to
finish. They talked and sang and had a good time. And they had somethin'
to eat at the close just as they did in the corn shucking. I never went
to a quilting.


Worship

Some of the Niggers went to church then just as they do now, and some of
them weren't allowed to go.

Reverend Winfield used to preach to the colored people that if they
would be good niggers and not steal their master's eggs and chickens and
things, that they might go to the kitchen of heaven when they died.

An old lady once said to me, "I would give anything if I could have
Maria in heaven with me to do little things for me." My mother told me
that the niggers had to turn the pots down to keep their voices from
sounding when they were praying at night. And they couldn't sing at all.


Weddings

I can remember that they used to have weddings when I was a child around
the years 1867 and 1868. My mother told me of marriages and weddings.
She never saw no paint on anybody's face. They used to have powder, but
they never used any paint. Girls were better then than they are now.


Fight with Master

My mother's first master was named Rasly, and her second was named
Neely. She and her young master, John McNeely, who was raised with her
and who was about the same age as she was, got to fighting one day and
she whipped him clear as a whistle. After she whipped him that fight
went all over the country. She was between sixteen and seventeen years
old an he was about the same. She had never been whipped by the white
folks.

She was in the kitchen. I don't know what the trouble started over. But
they had an argument. There were some other white boys in the kitchen
with her young master, and they kept pushing the two of them up to
fight. He wanted to show off; so he told her what he would do to her if
she didn't hush her mouth. She told him to just try it, and the fight
was on. So they fought for about an hour, and the other white boys egged
them on.

She said that her old master never did whip her, and she sure wasn't
going to let the young one do it. I never heard that they punished her
for whipping her young master. I never heard her say that anybody tried
to whip her at any other time. My mother was a strong woman. She could
lift one end of a log with any man.


Slave Uprisings

My mother used to say that when she was about fourteen years old, (That
was about the time that the stars fell, and the stars fell in 1833
[HW:*]. So she must have been born in 1819. In 1833, she was sold for a
fourteen year old girl. That was the only time that she ever was sold.
That left her about eighty-three years old when she died in 1903.) She
used to say that when she was about fourteen years old, and was living
in North Carolina in Mecklinburg Co, in Henderson County, that the white
folks called all the slaves up to the big house and kept them there a
few days. There wasn't no trouble on my mother's place, but they had
heard that there was an uprising among the slaves, and they called all
the Niggers up to the house. They didn't do nothin' to them. They just
called them up to the house, and kept them there. It all passed over
soon. I don't know nothin' else about it.


Confederate Army Negroes

I've "heered" old Brother Zachary who used to belong to Bethel Church
tell about the surrender. Brother Zachary is dead now. He was a soldier
In the Confederate army. He fought all through the war and he used to
tell lots of stories about it.

You know, Lee was a tall man, fine looking and dignified. Grant was a
little man and short. Those two generals walked up to each other with a
white flag in their hands. And they talked and agreed just when they
would fight. And then they both went back to their armies, and they
fought the awfulest battle you ever "heered" of. The men lay dead in
rows and rows and rows. The dead men covered whole fields. And General
Lee said that there wasn't any use doing any more fighting. General
Grant let all the rebels keep their guns. He didn't take nothin' away
from them.

I saw General Grant when he came to Little Rock. There was an old white
man who had never been to Little Rock in his life. He said "I just had
to come up here to see this great general that they are talking about."


Occupations

We always worked in the field in slave time. I don't know nothin about
share cropping because I always did days work. I used to get four and
five dollars a week for washing. But now they wants the young folks and
they don't pay them five dollars for everything. I can't get a pension.
Why you reckon they won't give me one. They don't understand that that
little house I own doesn't even keep itself up. My daughter-in-law is
good to me but she needs everything she makes. I can't get much to do
now, and what little I gets, they don't pay me much for.

I don' remember nothin' else.
