


Samuel Watson, a citizen of Evansville, Indiana, was born in Webster
County, Kentucky, February 14, 1862. His master's home was located two
and one half miles from Clay, Kentucky on Craborchard Creek.

"Uncle Sammy" as the negro children living near his home on South East
Fifth Street call the old man, possesses an unusually clear memory. In
fact he remembers seeing the soldiers and hearing the report of cannon
while he was yet an infant.

One story told by the old negro relates how; "old missus" saved "old
massa's horses". The story follows:

The mistress accompanied by a number of slaves was walking out one
morning and all were startled by the sound of hurrying horses. Soon many
mounted soldiers could be seen coming over a hill in the distance. The
child Samuel was later told that the soldiers were making their way to
Fort Donelson and were pressing horses into service. They were also
enlisting negroes into service whenever possible.

Old master, Thomas Watson, owned many good able-bodied slaves and many
splendid horses. The mistress realised the danger of loss and opening
the "big gate" that separated the corral from the forest lands, Mrs.
Watson ran into the midst of the horses shouting and frailing them. The
frightened horses ran into the forest off the highway and toward the
river.

When the soldiers stopped at the Watson plantation they found only a few
old work horses standing under a tree and not desiring these they want
on their way.

The little negro boy ran and hid himself in the corner made by a great
outside chimney, where he was found later, by his frightened mother.
Uncle Samuel remembers that the horses came home the following
afternoon, none missing.

Uncle Samuel remembers when the war ended and the slaves were
emancipated. "Some were happy! and some were sad!" Many dreaded leaving
their old homes and their masters' families.

Uncle Samuel's mother and three children were told that they were free
people and the master asked the mother to take her little ones and go
away.

She complied and took her family to the plantation of Jourdain James,
hoping to work and keep her family together. Wages received for her work
failed to support the mother and children so she left the employ of Mr.
James and worked from place to place until her children became half
starved and without clothing.

The older children, remembering better and happier days, ran away from
their mother and went back to their old master.

Thomas Watson went to Dixon, Kentucky and had an article of indenture
drawn up binding both Thomas and Laurah to his service for a long number
of years. Little Samuel only remained with his mother who took him to
the home of William Allen Price. Mr. Price's plantation was situated in
Webster County, Kentucky about half-way between Providence and Clay on
Craborchard Creek. Mr. Price had the little boy indentured to his
service for a period of eighteen years. There the boy lived and worked
on the plantation.

He said he had a good home among good people. His master gave him five
real whippings within a period of fourteen years but Uncle Samuel
believes he deserved every lash administered.

Uncle Samuel loved his master's family, he speaks of Miss Lena, Miss
Lula, Master Jefferson and Master John and believes they are still
alive. Their present home is at Cebra, Kentucky.

It was the custom for a slave indentured to a master to be given a fair
education, a good horse, bridle, saddle and a suit of clothes for his
years of toil, but Mr. Price did not believe the boy deserved the pay
and refused to pay him. A lawyer friend sued in behalf of the Negro and
received a judgement of $115.00 (one hundred and fifteen dollars).
Eighteen dollars repaid the lawyer for his service and Samuel started
out with $95.00 and his freedom.

Evansville became the home of Samuel Watson in 1882. The trip was made
by train to Henderson then on transfer boat along the Ohio to
Evansville.

The young negro man was impressed by the boat and crew and said he loved
the town from the first glimpse.

Dr. Bacon, a prominent citizen living at Chandler Avenue and Second
Street, employed Samuel as coachman. His next service was as house-man
for Levi Igleheart, 1010 Upper Second Street. Mr. Igleheart grew to
trust Samuel and gave him many privileges allowing him to care for
horses and to manage business for the family.

Samuel was married in 1890. His wife was born in Evansville and knew
nothing of slavery by birth or indenture.

Uncle Samuel was given a job at the Trinity Church, corner of Third and
Chestnut Streets. Mr. Igleheart recommended him for the position. He
received $30.00 per month for his services for a period of six years.

Mr. McNeely employed him for several years as janitor for lodges and
secret orders. The old negro was also a paper hanger and wall cleaner
and did well untill the panic seized him as it did others.

Uncle Samuel was entitled to an old age pension which he recieved from
1934 until 1935 but January 15th, 1936 something went wrong and the
money was with held. Then uncle Samuel was sent to the poor house. Still
he was not unhappy and did what he could to make others happy.

In 1936 he again applied and received the pension. $17.00 per month is
paid for his upkeep, his only labor consists of tending a little garden
and doing light chores. He lives with William Crosby on S.E. Fifth
Street.
