Emma Watson, born in 1852 or 1853, in Ellis Co., Texas, was one of the
slaves of the Carl Forrester family. Emma worked in the fields most of
her life, but is now too old to work, and is cared for by her daughter.
They live at 318 Allen St., Dallas, Texas.*

"I axed my old missus when I’s borned and she rec’lect I’m eight or nine
year old when de freedom war starts. She say she don’t make recall de
’xact time, but I takes May for a birthin’ time. They’s a time when some
sich was writ in de Bible, but it got burnt up ’fore I’s ageable. I
knows where I’m borned, though, and it am on Capt. Forrester’s farm in
Ellis County. His mother, Miss Susan, raises me like she am my mammy. I
calls her Sis Sue. She was old miss and Miss Lee was young miss.

"My paw, I don’t know nothin’ ’bout. My sister Anna and me, us have de
same paw, but my mammy’s sold out of Miss’sippi ’way from my paw ’fore
my birthin’. My maw kept de name of Lucindy Lane, but Martha and Jennie,
my other sisters, had diff’rent paws.

"I’s gone through so much of hard times all my life, but when I’s de
li’l gal I didn’t have much to do ’cept tend my Aunt Matilda’s babies
and wash they clothes. The rest the time I jes’ plays round. Miss Lee
have a china doll with a wreath of roses round it head. We takes turns
playin’ with it. I had a rag doll, and it jes’ a bundle of rags with
strings tied round it to give it a shape. Us make playhouses. Capt.
Forrester goes away and I heared he gone to some war, but, law me, I
didn’t know ’bout war den.

I’s jus’ glad to play and eat anythin’ I can git. When I git a tin can
of clabber and some bread, that’s what I wanted. They didn’t buy no
dishes for nigger young’uns to break up. Us et bacon and beef and salt
pork and cornbread with us fingers. Mussel shells is what we dipped
'stead of spoons. I did love de souse, too.

"When I had de chills, Sis Sue, dat Old Miss, come out to de quarters
and give me sweet milk boiled with pepper. I got shut of dem chills
'cause I didn’t like dat pepper tea, but I like it better’n quinine or
sage tea. I didn’t like to be sick noways, ’cause dey jus’ two
bedsteads, one for my mammy and my step-paw, and one for us gals.

"They allus promise me they’ll larn me to read and write, but never did
git to dat. Aunt Matilda did most de spinnin’ and weavin’ and sewin’. I
used to wear a shimmy and a dress in de week and a clean one for Sunday.
In winter sometimes us have a li’l sacque and homemake calfskin shoes
but mostly us have to stay inside iffen de weather ain’t mod’rate.

"De only frolics I ’member was candy pullin’s on Christmas. Dat all us
niggers knowed ’bout Christmas.

"One day Miss Tilda git de buggy whip to whip my mammy. It’s noontime,
and dey had blowed de horn for de field niggers to come eat. Maw grabs
de whip and says, ’Miss Tilda, you ain’t gwine do dat.’ Miss Tilda
didn’t say nothin’ for a day or two, den she say, ’Lucindy, you git your
young’uns and leave dis place.’ So us goes walkin’ down de road till us
come to some folk’s house and dey takes us in. Us dere ’bout a month
when mammy git sick. Dem folks sends word to de Forresters dere niggers
am sick and Sis Sue hitch up de hoss and come over. She brung food for
us every day, and say, ’Now, Lucindy, when you git able you bring your
young’uns on home and ’have yourself.’ My mammy dies when I’s ’bout ten
year old.


[Illustration: _Emma Watson_]


"After Capt. Forrester come back home dey tell us to watch out for de
Feds. Sis Sue say dey kill nigger young’uns. One day I’s comin’ through
de fields and see three men in blue coats on big bay hosses. I ran, but
dey passes me by big as you please. I seed plenty after dat, ’cause dey
come and asks for corn and Sis Sue allus say us don’t have ’nough for de
hosses. But dat night de corn allus leave de cribs. Dem Feds was sho’
thievin’ folks.

"I stays with de Forresters till I’s 22 year old, and dey give me food
and clothes, but never no money. Sis Sue used to say, ’Come here, you
li’l old free nigger.’ It make me so mad. But den I marries and have de
swiss white dress and us walk ’cross de fields to de preachers. Dat
every bit of fixin’ us have.

"Den us raise crops on de half-shares and sot up housekeepin’ with a
bedstead, some quilts and a li’l old stove. I has four young’uns and
every one of dem had schoolin’ and larnin’."
