


Mr. Whitted will be 89 years old next month October 1937. He was born in
Orange County, North Carolina. His mother took care of the white
children so her nine children were very well treated. The master was a
Doctor. The family were Hickory Quakers and did not believe in
mistreating their slaves, always providing them with plenty to eat, and
clothing to wear to church on Sunday. Despite a law that prohibited
books to Negroes, his family had a Bible, and an elementary spelling
book. Mr. Whitted's father belonged to his master's half-brother and
lived fourteen miles away. He was allowed a horse to go see them every
two weeks. The father could read, and spell very well so would teach
them on his visits. Mr. Whitted learned to read the Bible first, then in
later years has learned to read other things. It was the custom for the
master to search the negro huts, but Mr. Whitted's master never did.

The Doctor often took Mr. Whitted's grandmother with him to help care
for the sick. When the war broke out the Master's son joined the
southern forces. The son was wounded. The Doctor and Mr. Whitted's
grandmother went for the boy. On the way home the Doctor died but the
grandmother got the boy home and nursed him back to health. Life for the
Negroes was different after the son began running the place, he was not
good to them. Mr. Whitted was then 16 years old, and the older brother
was the overseer. The negroes had been allowed a share of the crop but
the new master refused them anything to live on. In that region the
wheat was harvested the middle of June. There was a big crop that year
but the entire family was turned out before the harvest, with nothing.
Mr. Whitted left his older brother with his mother and the children
sitting by the road, while he ran the 14 miles for his father to find
out what to do. The father borrowed two teams and wagons, rented a house
in the edge of town, and moved the family in.

The slaves were freed about that time, and for the first time in their
lives they were free, and the entire family together. The father went to
the governor for food. The government was allowing hard tack and
pickled beef for the negroes. They received their allotment, and were
well satisfied with hard tack because they were free. In telling about
the pickled beef he says he never has seen any beef since that looked
like it; he believed that it was horse meat. The father started working
in a mill in 1865. He was soon bringing home food stuff from there, and
in time they had a crop on their little place.

The older brother worked in the mornings and went to a Quaker Normal
School in the afternoon. Pres. Harrison gave him an appointment in the
revenue department, then as he grew older he was transferred to the post
office department. He was retired on a pension at the age of 75. He is
still living in Washington, D.C., and is now 97 years old.

During the war Mr. Whitted ran away, going 12 miles to the camp of the
northern soldiers where he stayed two weeks. They gave him a horse to
ride, and sent him gathering fuel through the woods for them. Those were
the happiest days he had ever known--his first freedom.

Mr. Whitted was never sold, but he often saw processions go past after a
sale, the wagon loaded with provisions first, then the slaves tied
together following. They often took the babies away from their mothers,
and sold them. Some old woman, too old to work, would then care for the
little ones until they were old enough to work. At six years old they
were put to work thinning corn, worming the tobacco, and pulling weeds.
At seven they were taught to use a hoe. At 16 they were full hands,
working along with the older men.

In April 1880 Mr. Whitted left Orange County, it was so very rough it
was hard to make a living. He just started out in search of a better
place, leaving his wife and seven children there. In November he sent
for them, he was working at the brick yards in Rockville. They were
finishing the court house. He was so anxious to make a living he often
did as much as two men. One child was born here. His wife died soon
after coming to Rockville. He stayed single for three years, but found
he could not care for his family and married again. His second wife died
a number of years ago. He now spends the winters with his three living
daughters, and during the summer months, a daughter comes to Rockville
to enjoy his home.

Mr. Whitted's uncle belonged to a mean master. The slaves worked hard
all day, then were chained together at night. The uncle ran away in the
early part of the war, and after two years broke through the lines, and
joined the northern army, going back after emancipation.
