



Who is the oldest ex-slave in Wilkes County? This question was answered
the other day when the quest ended on the sunny porch of a little
cottage on Lexington Road in Washington-Wilkes, for there in a straight
old-fashioned split-bottom chair sat "Aunt" Adeline Willis basking in
the warm October sunshine. She is remarkable for her age--she doesn't
know just exactly how old she is, from all she tells and what her "white
folks" say she is around a hundred. Her general health is good, she
spends her days in the open and tires only on the days she cannot be out
in her place in the sun. She has the brightest eyes, her sight is so
good she has never had to wear glasses; she gets around in the house and
yard on her cane. Her memory is excellent, only a time or two did she
slowly shake her head and say apologetically--"Mistress, it's been so
long er go, I reckon I done forgot".

From her long association with white people she uses very little Negro
dialect and always refers to her Mother as "Mother", never as Ma or
Mammy as most Negroes do. This is very noticable.

Her mother was Marina Ragan, "cause she belonged to the Ragans,"
explained Aunt Adeline, "and she was born on the Ragan Plantation right
down on Little River in Greene County" (Georgia). When Marina's "young
Mistress" married young Mr. Mose Wright of Oglethorpe County, she took
Marina to her new home to be her own servant, and there is where Adeline
was born. The place was known as the Wright Plantation and was a very
large one.

Adeline doesn't remember her father, and strange to say, she cannot
recall how many brothers and sisters she had though she tried hard to
name them all. She is sure, however, there were some older and some
younger, "I reckon I must er come along about the middle", she said.

After a little while Aunt Adeline was living far back in the past and
talked freely--with questions now and then to encourage her
reminiscences, she told many interesting things about her life as a
slave.

She told about the slaves living in the Quarters--log houses all in a
long row near the "white folks' house", and how happy they were. She
couldn't remember how many slaves were on the plantation, but was sure
there were many: "Yas'm, my Marster had lots of niggers, jest how many,
I don't know, but there sho' was a sight of us". They were given their
allowance of "rations" every week and cooked their own meals in their
cabins. They had good, plain, home-raised things to eat--"and we was
glad to get it too. We didn't have no fancy fixings, jest plain food".
Their clothes were made by Negro sewing women out of cloth spun and
woven right there in the Quarters. All the little dresses were made
alike. "When they took a notion to give us striped dresses we sho' was
dressed up. I never will forget long as I live, a hickory
stripe--(that's what they called stripes in them days)--dress they made
me, it had brass buttons at the wrist bands. I was so proud of that
dress and felt so dressed up in it I jest strutted er round with it on",
and she chuckled over the recollection of that wonderful dress she wore
so long ago.

When asked what was the very first thing she remembered, Aunt Adeline
gave a rather surprising answer: "The first thing I recollect is my love
for my Mother--I loved her so and would cry when I couldn't be with her,
and as I growed up I kept on loving her jest that a-way even after I
married and had children of my own."

The first work she did was waiting in the house. Before she could read
her mistress taught her the letters on the newspapers and what they
spelled so she could bring them the papers they wanted. Her mother
worked in the field: she drove steers and could do all kinds of farm
work and was the best meat cutter on the plantation. She was a good
spinner too, and was required to spin a broach of "wool spinning" every
night. All the Negro women had to spin, but Aunt Adeline said her mother
was specially good in spinning wool and "that kind of spinning was
powerful slow". Thinking a moment, she added: "And my mother was one of
the best dyers anywhere 'round, and I was too. I did make the most
colors by mixing up all kinds of bark and leaves. I recollect the
prettiest sort of a lilac color I made with maple bark and pine bark,
not the outside pine bark, but that little thin skin that grows right
down next to the tree--it was pretty, that color was."

Aunt Adeline thinks they were more fortunate than any other little
slaves she knew because their marster had a little store right there
where he would give them candy every now and then--bright pretty sticks
of candy. She remembers one time he gave them candy in little tin cups,
and how proud of those cups they were. He never gave them money, but out
of the store they could get what money bought so they were happy. But
they had to have whippings, "yas'um, good er bad we got them whippings
with a long cowhide kept jest fer that. They whipped us to make us grow
better, I reckon".

Although they got whippings a-plenty they were never separated by sale.
"No mam, my white folks never believed in selling their niggers", said
Aunt Adeline, and related an incident proving this. "I recollect once my
oldest brother done something Marster didn't like an' he got mighty mad
with him an' said 'Gus, I'm goin' ter sell you, I ain't a-goin' to keep
you no longer'. Mistress spoke up right quick and said: 'No you ain't
a-goin' to sell Gus, neither, he's nussed and looked after all our
oldest chillun, and he's goin' to stay right here'. And that was the
last of that, Gus was never sold--he went to war with his young Marster
when he went and died up there in the war cause he was homesick, so
Marster come back and said."

Aunt Adeline was surprised when asked if the Doctor ever was called in
to see her or any of the slaves when they were sick back in slavery
days--in fact she was a bit indignant as she answered; "_No mam_, I was
born, growed up, married, had sixteen children and never had no Doctor
with me 'til here since I got so old". She went on to say that her white
folks looked after their Negroes when they were sick.

They were given tonics and things to keep them well so sickness among
them was rare. No "store-bought" medicines, but good old home-made
remedies were used. For instance, at the first sniffle they were called
in and given a drink of fat lightwood tea, made by pouring boiling water
over finely split kindling--"that" explained Aunt Adeline, "was cause
lightwood got turpentine in it". In the Springtime there was a mixture
of anvil dust (gathered up from around the anvil in the blacksmith's
shop) and mixed with syrup, and a teaspoon full given every morning or
so to each little piccaninny as they were called up in the "white folks'
yard". Sometimes instead of this mixture they were given a dose of
garlic and whisky--all to keep them healthy and well.

There was great rejoicing over the birth of a Negro baby and the white
folks were called upon to give the little black stranger a name.

Adeline doesn't remember anything about the holidays and how they were
spent, not even Christmas and Thanksgiving, but one thing she does
remember clearly and that is: "All my white folks was Methodist folks,
and they had fast days and no work was done while they was fastin' and
prayin'. And we couldn't do no work on Sunday, no mam, everybody had to
rest on that day and on preachin' days everybody went to church, white
and black to the same church, us niggers set up in the gallery that was
built in the white folks' church for us".

There wasn't any time for play because there was so much work to do on a
big plantation, but they had good times together even if they did have
so much to do.

Before Adeline was grown her "young Mistress," Miss Mary Wright, married
Mr. William Turner from Wilkes County, so she came to the Turner
Plantation to live, and lived there until several years after the War.
Adeline hadn't been in her new home long before Lewis Willis, a young
Negro from the adjoining plantation, started coming to see her. "Lewis
come to see me any time 'cause his Marster, Mr. Willis, give him a pass
so he wasn't scared to be out at night 'count of the Patterollers. They
didn't bother a nigger if he had a pass, they sho' did beat him." [HW: ?]

When Adeline was fourteen years old she and Lewis married, or rather it
was like this: "We didn't have no preacher when we married, my Marster
and Mistess said they didn't care, and Lewis's Master and Mistress said
they didn't care, so they all met up at my white folks' house and had us
come in and told us they didn't mind our marryin'. My Marster said, 'Now
you and Lewis wants to marry and there ain't no objections so go on and
jump over the broom stick together and you is married'. That was all
there was to it and we was married. I lived on with my white folks and
he lived on with his and kept comin' to see me jest like he had done
when he was a courtin'. He never brought me any presents 'cause he
didn't have no money to buy them with, but he was good to me and that
was what counted."

Superstition and signs still have a big place in the life of this woman
even after a hundred long years. She has outlived or forgotten many she
used to believe in, but still holds fast to those she remembers. If a
rooster crows anywhere near your door somebody is coming "and you might
as well look for 'em, 'cause that rooster done told you". When a person
dies if there is a clock in the room it must be stopped the very minute
of death or it will never be any more good--if left ticking it will be
ruined. Every dark cloudy day brings death--"Somebody leaving this
unfriendly world today". Then she is sure when she "feels sadness" and
doesn't know why, it a sign somebody is dying "way off somewhere and we
don't know it". Yes, she certainly believes in all the signs she
remembers even "to this good day", as she says.

When asked about the war Aunt Adeline said that times were much harder
then: "Why we didn't have no salt--jest plain salt, and couldn't get
none them days. We had to get up the dirt in the smokehouse where the
meat had dripped and 'run it' like lye, to get salt to put on
things--yas'm, times was sho' hard and our Marster was off in war all
four years and we had to do the best we could. We niggers wouldn't know
nothing about it all if it hadn't a been for a little old black, sassy
woman in the Quarters that was a talkin' all the time about 'freedom'.
She give our white folks lots of trouble--she was so sassy to them, but
they didn't sell her and she was set free along with us. When they all
come home from the war and Marster called us up and told us we was free,
some rejoiced so they shouted, but some didn't, they was sorry. Lewis
come a runnin' over there an' wanted me and the chillun to go on over to
his white folks' place with him, an' I wouldn't go--_No mam_, I wouldn't
leave my white folks. I told Lewis to go on and let me 'lone, I knowed
my white folks and they was good to me, but I didn't know his white
folks. So we kept living like we did in slavery, but he come to see me
every day. After a few years he finally 'suaded me to go on over to the
Willis place and live with him, and his white folks was powerful good to
me. After a while, tho' we all went back and lived with my white folks
and I worked on for them as long as I was able to work and always felt
like I belonged to 'em, and you know, after all this long time, I feel
like I am their's."

"Why I live so long, you asking? 'Cause I always been careful and took
good care of myself, eat a plenty and stayed out in the good fresh open
air and sunshine when I could--and then I had a good husband that took
care of me." This last reason for her long life was added as an after
thought and since Lewis, her husband, has been dead these forty years
maybe those first named causes were the real ones. Be that as it may,
Aunt Adeline is a very remarkable old woman and is most interesting to
talk with.
