
Wayman Williams does not know his age, but he was a small boy when the
slaves were freed. He was born in Mississippi, but the first place he
remembers is the Sanama plantation on the Trinity river, in Texas. He
now lives on North Falls St., in Mart, Texas.*

"I was one of four chillen of Calvin and Julia Williams, of de state of
Mississippi, when they was first married, ’fore they come to Texas. But
de earlies’ ’lection I has, was livin’ on a plantation belongin’ to a
Mr, Sanama. It was on de Trinity river, right down in de bottoms. My
folks stayed on dere after freedom and I lived with dem till I was
nearly growed. Dere massa give dem supplies and let dem work a piece of
land and they give him half de crop.

"I ’member times us go huntin’ and kill most anything we want, wild
turkeys and wild hawgs and deer. My father used to go out and kill deer
and not git out of sight of de house. Livin’ was easier den now, for we
had all dem things without havin’ to buy dem. I ’member de bear hunts.
We had great big, brindle dogs for de bears and dey surroun’ him and
stand him at bay till de men came and kill him.

"A man by name of Burton lived near us, and one day he sent one he boys
to town on a little race hoss. On de way home dat boy crossin’ de river
bottom and a panther git after him, and he race he hoss and outrun dat
panther. He Jump off de hoss and run in de house and lock de door. De
panther try to git in and de men in de field hear he cries and shoots
him. In dose days de men took guns to de fields.

"They cotched wolves and bears in traps but de panther was de most
dang’rous animal us have to fight. Us never know when he goin’ to
strike. One our neighbors go to town after a turkey and on he way home a
panther was sittin’ in a tree by de road, and he make a lunge at de man
and grab de turkey and tear de man’s arm. Once my grandpa ridin’ 'long
one night, crossin’ de river, and a panther git after him. He had a fast
hoss and outran dat panther, and got to de house, and two our bear dogs
kep’ it off till he shot it. I knows dese things am true, for they
happen jes’ like I tell it.

"Our house was close to de boat landin’ on de river and my father helped
unload supplies from de boats, when he not workin’ in de fields. Jedge
Beavers own de storehouse what kep’ de supplies, and he ship he cotton
by boat to de Gulf, mostly to Galveston.

"De ’Federate sojers pass our house and go to Jedge for him to give dem
something to eat and he allus did. Sometimes dey was men on hosses and
he give dem feed for de hosses. Once a crowd young fellows comin’ home
from de war on hosses and dey got supplies, and de Jedge give dem a
little toddy for to make dem feel good. Dey feels so good dey gits some
ribbon from de store and tie it to de hosses heads and rides off, with
dat ribbon jes’ a-streamin’ from de hosses mane.

"De Jedge enjoy all day. He felt like dey been fightin’ for him and dey
welcome to what he have. It was de common thing for de sojers to stop at
the house and ask for food or to sleep. Sometimes niggers come, what run
away to de North ’fore freedom. Dey done got tired of dat cold weather
up dere and when freedom come, dey ready to come back home.

"When de slaves sot free, dey have big times, and feel like dey not work
at all. But when old massa give dem a place to farm and tell dem iffen
dey don’t work dey won’t eat, dey stays with him and works de crops on
halves, mostly. De nigger do de work and massa feed him and give him
team and tools, den massa git half de crop.

"De slaves what went up North and come back, tell how dey call
'Contrabands’ up dere. Dey didn’t know what it mean, but dey come back
anyway.

"Some white school teachers from up North come to teach de chillen, but
dey didn’t talk like folks here and didn’t understan’ our talk. Dey
didn’t know what us mean when us say ’titty’ for sister, and ’budder’
for brother, and ’nanny’ for mammy. Jes’ for fun us call ourselves big
names to de teacher, some be named General Lee and some Stonewall
Jackson. We be one name one day and ’nother name next day. Until she git
to know us she couldn’t tell de diff’rence, ’cause us all look alike to
her. Us have good times tellin’ her ’bout black magic and de conjure. Us
tell her night birds full of magic and dere feathers roast in ashes work
spells what kill evil conjure. If a rabbit run ’cross de path, turn your
hat round and wear it hind part befo’ to keep bad luck away. A buzzard’s
claw tie round de baby’s neck make teethin’ easy. De teacher from de
North don’t know what to think of all dat. But our old missy, who live
here all de time, know all ’bout it. She lets us believe our magic and
conjure, ’cause she partly believe it, too.

"I lives in dat place till I’s a big boy and den works for Mr. John
Mergersen and a Mr. Porter. Dey come from Mississippi right after
freedom and was jes’ like homefolks. So I works for dem till I gits
married and starts out for myself.

"I ’member some songs my mammy and old missy larnt me. One go like dis:

    "’De top bolls ain’ open,
    De bottom bolls am rotten.
    I can’t git my number here,
    I has to quit and go ’way.

    "’When de sun go down and de moon go up,
    Iffen I can’t git my number, I can’t git my pay.’

"When I was little, my father split de rails out of trees to make
fences, and I have an aunt what was de big woman, and she holp. She have
a song what go like dis, and when she sing, she come down on a rail,
’biff’.

    "’Times are gittin’ hard,’ (biff)
    Money’s gittin scarce,’ (biff)
    Times don’t git no better here,’ (biff)
    I bound to leave dis place.’

"But when de big meetin’ goin’ on, dis one de songs dey likes to sing:

    "’As I went down in de valley to pray,
    I met de debbil on my way,
    What you reckon he say to me?
    You’re too young to die,
    And too young to pray,
    I made him a lie, and kep’ on my way.’

"We raised corn and cotton and potatoes and lots of vegetables and
fruit. We didn’t have no wheat, so we couldn’t have flour and it too
high to buy. All dem what could buy it, was de landowner.

"When de corn gathered, us pile it in piles and have corn shuckin’ at
night, cook our supper and all eat together and listen to de stories
tell by de old folks. When dey git de piles of corn ready for shuckin’,
dey lay a rail in de middle and ’vide de piles, and de side what git
through first git supper first. De song go like dis:

    "’Hits a mighty dry year, when de crab grass fail,
    Oh, row, row, row, who laid dat rail?
    Hit am mighty dark night when de nigger turn pale,
    De big foot nigger what laid dat rail!
    Oh, row, row, row, who laid dat rail?
    Rinktum, ranktum, laid dat rail.
    Show me de nigger what laid dat rail,
    Oh, row, row, row, who laid dat rail?

    "’When de niggers fuss, de white folks fail,
    Oh, row, row, row, who laid dat rail?
    We’re gittin’ dere now, don’t tell no tale,
    Show me de nigger what laid dat rail.
    I’ll stick he head in a big tin pail.
    Oh, turn me loose, let me tech dat rail,
    Oh, row, row, row, who laid dat rail?

"First us have white preachers and den, after freedom, de niggers starts
to git up in meetin’ and talk to sinners, and dey call dem ’Exhorters.’
De white folks larnt de exhorters to read de Bible and some songs, and
de niggers all larn de songs, too. De exhorter git up and read de
scripture and it ’bout King Neb’kudneezer, when he have a golden image
with silver horns, and all de kings and rulers come and bow down ’fore
dat image, ’cepting three. Dem was Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Dey
would not bow down, so de old king throw dem in de furnace and dey not
burn up, and dey say, ’De Gawd us worship am able to deliver us from de
fiery furnace.’


[Illustration: _Wayman Williams and Henry Freeman_]


"Den de exhorter say: ’Now, you no count niggers, what you mean stealin’
de white folks chickens and watermillions? Dey ain’t safe no longer dan
de white man back am turned. Do you think Gawd would save you? No, sir!
You be turned into de pillar of salt iffen you don’t stop you
unrighteous ways, and den where you be? You won’t see no dancin’ or hear
no chickens hollerin’. Come on into de pearly gates and live right.
Leave your stealin’ and cussin’ and dancin’ to de debbil, and come to de
mourners’ bench.

    "’Let de sun of salvation shine square on you face,
    Fight de battles of de Lawd, fight soon and fight late,
    And you’ll allus find de latch to de golden gate.
    No use for to wait till tomorrow,
    De sun mustn’t sot on you sorrow,
    Sin’s sharp as a bamboo briar,
    Ask de Lawd for to fotch you up higher.’

"Dem songs was de gateway to enter, de pearly gateway. All de niggers
git on de mourners’ bench and git saved."
