Wash Wilson, 94, was born a slave of Tom Wilson, in Louisiana, near the
Ouachita Road. Wash and his family were purchased by Bill Anderson, who
brought them to Robertson Co., Texas. Wash lives in Eddy, Texas.*

"I was ’bout eighteen years old when de Civil war come. Us calls it de
Freedom War. I was born in Louisiana, clost to de Ouachita Road, and
Marse Tom Wilson owned mammy and us chillen. But Marse Bill Anderson he
come from Texas to buy us from Marse Tom. Marse Tom, he ’lowed de
gov’ment gwine let dem damn Yankees give de South a whuppin’ and dere
wasn’t gwine be no slaves nowhere. But Marse Bill say we’s a likely
bunch of chillen and mammy am a grand cook, so guess he take de resk.

"Marse Tom starts to Texas where he had a passel of land. Us was sold on
de block to him, ’cause Marse Tom say he gwine git all he done put in us
out us, iffen he can ’fore de Yanks take dis country.

"Mammy was named Julia Wilson. Sis Sally was oldest of us chillen, den
brudder Harry and me. Marse Bill he had 27,000 acres of land in
Robertson County what he git for fightin’ Indians and sech. He lived in
seven mile of Calvert, Texas, and dat where he brunged us and de
supplies and sech. Us traveled in ox carts and hoss back, and de mos’ us
niggers walked.

"Us was sot free on de road to Texas. Us camp one night and some folks
come talk with Marse Bill. De next mornin’ he told us, ’Boys, you’s free
as I is.’ Us was only ’bout sixteen mile from where us gwine and Marse
Bill say, ’All what want to stay with me can.’ Us didn’t know nobody and
didn’t have nothin’ and us liked Marse Bill, so all us stayed with him.
When we got to his place us did round and ’bout, clearin’ new ground and
buildin’ cabins and houses. Dere was three log houses but us had to
build more.

"My pappy name was Bill Wilson. All my folks am dead now, but on de
plantation in Louisiana we had a good time. Mammy could cook and spin
and weave. Dey raised cotton and sugar cane and corn.

"Dere wasn’t many Indians when us come, in our part de country. All I
ever saw jes’ steal and beg. Dere was plenty wild turkeys and wild hawgs
and deer and prairie chickens.

"On Marse Bill’s place every quarters had its barn and mule, but Marse
and he wife, Miss Deborah, lived in de quality quarters. Round dem was
de blacksmith shop and smokehouse and spinnin’ house and Marse Bill have
a li’l house jus’ for he office. De cookhouse was a two-room house side
de big house with a covered passage to de dinin’ room. De milk house was
de back part de cook house.

"In de smokehouse was hams and sides of hawg meat and barrels of syrup
and sugar and lard, and bushels of onions, and de ’tater room was allus
full. Dey dug a big place and put poles and pieces of cane and lumber
cross, like a top, and put dirt and leaves and banked de dirt round de
'tater room. Dey’d leave a place to crawl in, but dey kep’ it tight and
dem ’taters dey kep’ most all winter.

"Dey was hayricks and chicken roosties and big lye hoppers where us put
all de fireplace ashes. Come de rain and de water run through dat hopper
into de trough under it, and dat make lye water. De women put old meat
skins and bones and fat in de big, iron pot in de yard and put in some
lye water and bile soap. Den dey cut it when it git cold and put it on
de smokehouse shelves to dry. Dat sho’ fine soap.

"Mammy worked in de kitchen mostly and spin by candlelight. Dey used a
bottle lamp. Dat a rag or piece of big string, stuck in de snuff bottle
full of tallow or grease. Later on in de years, dey used coal oil in de
bottles. Sometimes dey wrap a rag round and round and put it in a pan of
grease, and light dat for de lamp. Dey used pine torches, too.

"De black folks’ quarters was log cabins, with stick and dirt chimneys.
Dey had dere own garden round each cabin and some chickens, but dere
wasn’t no cows like in Louisiana. Dere was lots of possums in de bottoms
and us go coon and possum huntin’. I likes cornbread and greens, cook
with de hawg jowls or strip bacon. Dat’s what I’s raised on. Us had lots
of lye hominy dem days. Marse Bill, he gwine feed everybody good on his
place. Den us had ash cake, make of corn meal. Us didn’t buy much till
long time after de War.

"Us had poles stuck in de corner and tied de third pole cross, to make
de bed. Dey called ’Georgia Hosses’. Us filled ticks with corn shucks or
crab grass and moss. Dey wasn’t no cotton beds for de niggers, ’cause
dey wasn’t no gins for de long time and de cotton pick from de seed by
hand and dat slow work. De white folks had cotton beds and feather beds
and wool beds.

"Marse Bill allus had de doctor for us iffen de old woman couldn’t git
us well. All de seven families Marse Bill done buy in Louisiana stayed
round him and he family till dey all dead, white and cullud. I’s de
onlies’ one left.

"Us piled ’bout a hundred or two or maybe three hundred bushels corn
outside de shed. Us have corn shuckin’ at night and have de big time. De
fellow what owned de corn, he give a big supper and have all de whiskey
us want. Nobody got drunk, ’cause most everybody carry dey liquor purty
well. After shuckin’ us have ring plays. For music dey scratch on de
skillet lids or beat bones or pick de banjo. Dere be thirty to fifty
folks, all cullud, and sometimes dey stay all night, and build de big
fire and dance outdoors or in de barn.

"Dere wasn’t no music instruments. Us take pieces a sheep’s rib or cow’s
jaw or a piece iron, with a old kettle, or a hollow gourd and some
horsehairs to make de drum. Sometimes dey’d git a piece of tree trunk
and hollow it out and stretch a goat’s or sheep’s skin over it for de
drum. Dey’d be one to four foot high and a foot up to six foot ’cross.
In gen’ral two niggers play with de fingers or sticks on dis drum. Never
seed so many in Texas, but dey made some. Dey’d take de buffalo horn and
scrape it out to make de flute. Dat sho’ be heared a long ways off. Den
dey’d take a mule’s jawbone and rattle de stick ’cross its teeth. Dey’d
take a barrel and stretch a ox’s hide ’cross one end and a man sot
'stride de barrel and beat on dat hide with he hands, and he feet, and
iffen he git to feelin’ de music in he bones, he’d beat on dat barrel
with he head. ’Nother man beat one wooden side with sticks. Us ’longed
to de church, all right, but dancin’ ain’t sinful iffen de foots ain’t
crossed. Us danced at de arbor meetin’s but us sho’ didn’t have us foots
crossed!

"When de niggers go round singin’ ’Steal Away to Jesus,’ dat mean dere
gwine be a ’ligious meetin’ dat night. Dat de sig’fication of a meetin’.
De masters ’fore and after freedom didn’t like dem ’ligious meetin’s, so
us natcherly slips off at night, down in de bottoms or somewheres.
Sometimes us sing and pray all night.

"I voted till I’s ’bout forty five year old, den I jes’ kinder got out
de habit.

"I got married in a suit of doeskin jeans, ain’t none like dem nowadays.
I married Cornelia Horde and she wore a purty blue gingham de white
folks buyed and made for her. Us had six chillen, Calvin and Early and
Mary and Fred and Frank.

"Iffen you knows someone workin’ a conjure trick ’gainst you, jes’ take
some powdered brick and scrub the steps real good. Dat’ll kill any
conjure spell, sho’. De bes’ watchdog you can get for de hoodoo is a
frizzly chicken. Iffen you got one dem on de place, you can rest in
peace, ’cause it scratches up every trick lay down ’gainst its owner.
Iffen you see dat frizzly chicken scratchin’ round de place, it a sho’
sign you been conjured. A frizzly chicken come out he shell backwards,
and day why he de devil’s own.

"De old folks allus told me to make a cross inside my shoe every mornin’
'fore leavin’ de house, den ain’t no conjurer gwine git he conjure
'gainst you foots. Iffen you wear you under clothes wrong side out, you
can’t be conjured. ’nother way am to put saltpetre in de soles you
shoes. Iffen you wears a li’l piece de ’peace plant’ in you pocket or
you shoe, dat powerful strong ’gainst conjure. A piece of de Betsy bug’s
heart with some silver money am good. But iffen you can’t git none dose,
jes’ take a piece newspaper and cut it de size of you shoe sole and
sprinkle nine grains red pepper on it. Dere ain’t no hoodoo gwine ever
harm you den, ’cause he’d have to stop and count every letter on dat
newspaper and by dat time, you gwine be ’way from dere.


[Illustration: _Wash Wilson_]


"Iffen you want to find de conjure tricks what done been sot for you,
jes’ kill you a fat chicken and sprinkle some its blood in da conjure
doctor’s left palm. Den take you forefinger and hit dat blood till it
spatter, and it gwine spatter in da direction where dat trick am hid.
Den when you find de trick, sprinkle a li’l quicksilver over a piece of
paper and put da paper on de fire, and dat trick gwine be laid forever.

"Old folks done told me how to make a conjurer leave town. Make up a
hick’ry fire and let it burn down to coals. Den you take up two live
coals. One dese gwine be you, and de other gwine be de luck. Take up one
dead coal, and dat you enemy. Den you jes’ keep ’wake till de rooster
crow or midnight. Dat am de end of de day. Now you chunk de live coal
what am you to de south, de warm country; den throw de other live coal
to de east; den chunk de dead coal, you enemy, to de north, de cold
country. Nothin’ of de conjurer can’t git over fire, and ’fore de week
out, dat conjurer be leavin’.

"A old Indian who used to hang round Marse Bill’s place say to git de
best of a conjurer, git some clay from da mouth a crawfish hole, and
some dirt from a red ant’s hole. Mix dem and wet dem with whiskey or
camphor. Git some angleworms and boil dem and add de worm water to de
clay and dirt. Iffen you rubs de conjured pusson with dis, he trouble
done go ’way."
