



"Oh, my God a mercy, child, dat been a time when dat shake come here. I
tell you, dat been somethin. I sho remember all bout dat cause I been a
grown woman de year dat earthquake come here. Yes, mam, I gwine tell it
to you just like I experience it. We had all just been get over wid us
supper en little things dat night en I had washed Auntie en Mr. Rowell's
feet for dem to lie down en dere come such a sketch of clouds from over
in dat direction dat I never know what to make of it. Auntie en Mr.
Rowell never know what to make of it neither. I remember, I run out to
help my sister dat been out to de paddlin block en, honey, you ain'
never live to see no black cloud like dat been. I washed a piece through
en den I left off en went back in de house en set down by de fire to dry
my feet. I set dere awhile en seems like somethin just speak right out
de fire, bout dat time, en tell me to move my feet dat I was in bad
shape. En, child, it de truth of mercy, dere come a big clog of dirt out
dat chimney en drap (drop) right down in de spot whe' my foot was. I run
to Auntie en Mr. Rowell to see could dey tell what dat was, but dey been
in just as much darkness as I been. I look up en seems like de loft had
lowered itself en could hear a roarin for miles en miles bout dere en
could hear de people hollerin every which a way. Yes, mam, could hear
dem hollerin miles en on top of miles bout dere. My God, dem people was
scared to lie down dat night en such a prayin en a shoutin as everybody
do dat night, I ain' never see de like fore den. Ain' see de like since
den neither. Next mornin, I go to work for de white folks en dey all go
off dat mornin en I tell you, I was scared bout to death in dat big
house by myself. I remember, I left out de house en been out in de
'tatoe patch grabblin 'tatoes right along en when I raise up, dat thing
was comin down dat 'tatoe row just a whirlin en a makin right for me.
Yes, mam, I been so scared. I ain' see whe' I is grow a bit since de
shake. I tell you, I thought it was de Jedgment. Den we hear dere was
gwine be another earthquake, but de people get on dey knees en dey stay
on dey knees en it never come here dat time. Dat one was in another
state, so dey tell me. I hear talk dat all de earth caved in en you
could see de people down dere, but couldn' nobody get dem. Some people
say dat been de devil do dat, but I tell dem de devil ain' had no such
power. De Lord been de power dat bring dat shake here, I say."

"Oh, Lord, de people sho fared better in dat day en time den dey do dese
days. Cose dey didn' have a heap of different kind of trashy things like
dey have dese days, but dey had a plenty to eat en a plenty to wear all
de time en den everything was better in dem times, too. Now, I speak
bout what I know bout. De rations eat better en de cloth wear better,
too, in dem days den dey do now. You see, mostly, de people would make
dey own provisions at home. White folks would raise abundance of hogs en
cows to run all dey big plantation from one year to de other. Wouldn'
never clear out of meat no time cause de stock been let loose to run at
large in dem days. De most dat dey bought was dey sugar en dey coffee,
but dem what was industrious en smart, dey made most dey victuals at
home. Made dey own rice en winnowed it right dere home. Oh, dey had one
of dese pestle en mortar to beat it out. Yes, mam, de pestle been big at
one end an little at de other end. Den dey would raise turkeys en geese
en chickens en dere wasn' no end to de birds en squirrels en rabbits en
fish in dat day en time. Dat is, dem what cared for demselves, dey had
all dem things. Cose dere was some den like dere be now dat been too
lazy to work en dey hand was empty all de time. I remember, dem
poorbuckras would just go bout from one house to another en catch
somethin here, dere en yonder."

"Den de people never wore none of dese kind of clothes like de people
wear dese days neither. When a person got a dress den, dey made it
demselves en dey made dey own underskirts den, too. You see, all dese
underskirts en bloomers like de people does buy dese days, dey didn'
have nothin like dat den. Used to put 10 yard in a dress en 10 yards in
a underskirt en would tuck dem clean up to dey waist. En, child, when
dey would iron dat dress, it would stand up in de floor just like dere
been somebody in it. When I say iron, I talkin bout de people would iron
den, too. Yes, mam, when I come along, de people been take time to iron
dey garments right. Oh, dey clothes would be just as slick as glass.
Won' a wrinkle nowhe' bout dem. Another thing, dey used to have dese
dove colored linen dusters dat dey would wear over dey dress when dey
would ride to church. Den when dey went in de church, dey would pull dem
off en put dem on again when dey started home. Dey was made sort of like
a coat suit, except dey was a little fuller en would come clean down to
de tail of de dress. You see, dey was meant to protect de dress while
dey was gwine along de road."

"De world sho gwine worser dese days, honey. Oh, Lord, de people worser.
Yes, mam, dey worser, I say. Dey ain' got de mother wit. Dey weaker en
dey wiser, I say, but dey ain' got de mother wit. Can' set down en talk
to de people dese days en dey take dat what you got to say in like dey
used to. En de people don' take de time to teach de chillun to know
good things like dey used to en dat how-come dey have more time to get
in so much of devilment dese days. Yes, mam, de people used to have more
chillun en dey raised dem, too. Chillun know more den grown people do
dese days, I say. People used to know how to carry demselves en take
care of demselves more den dey do now. Seems like, de people more
rattlin en brazen den what dey used to be."


  _Source_: Julia Woodberry, colored, Marion, S.C.--Age, 70-80.
  Personal interview by Annie Ruth Davis, Nov., 1937.
