



"Well, I can speak bout what I used to hear my auntie en my mammy en my
grandmammy talk bout what happen in dey day, but I never didn' live in
slavery time. My mammy, she been broke her leg long time fore freedom
come here en I remember she tell me often times, say, 'Julia, you didn'
lack much of comin here a slavery child.' Honey, I mean she been in de
family way right sharp fore freedom come here.

"My mammy, she was raise right down dere to de other side de jail to de
'Cedars'. You know dere whe' all dem cedars round dat house what bout to
fall down. She belong to de lawyer Phillips dere en he wouldn' never
allow her to get out de family. She had been a free woman fore he had
stole her off de sea beach to be his house woman. Yes, mam, stole my
mammy en uncle John, too, off de sea beach, but uncle John went back
after freedom come here. My mammy, she been raise from just a child to
be de house woman dere to de lawyer Phillips en she never didn' know
nothin bout choppin cotton till her last baby been bout knee high.

"I remember how my mammy used to tell me bout dat de colored people won'
allowed to go from one plantation to another widout dey had a 'mit
(permit) from dey Massa. Yes, mam, all de niggers had to have dat strip
somewhat bout dem to keep from gettin a beatin. Couldn' leave dey home
widout showin dat 'mit from dey Massa. You see, de nigger men would
want to go to see dey wives en dey would have to get a 'mit from dey
Massa to visit dem. Cose dey wouldn' live together cause dey wives would
be here, dere en yonder. It been like dis, sometimes de white folks
would sell de wife of one of dey niggers way from dey husband en den
another time, dey would sell de husband way from dey wife. Yes, mam,
white folks had dese guard, call patroller, all bout de country to catch
en whip dem niggers dat been prowl bout widout dat strip from dey Massa.
I remember I hear talk dey say, 'Patroller, Patroller, let nigger pass.'
Dey would say dat if de nigger had de strip wid dem en if dey didn' have
it, dey say, 'Patroller, Patroller, cut nigger slash.'"

"Child, I tell you dat been a day to speak bout. When I come along, de
women never vote, white nor colored, en it been years since I see a
colored person vote, but I remember dey been gwine to vote in dat day en
time just like dey was gwine to a show. Oh, honey, de road would be full
of dem. Dey had to vote. Remember, way back dere, everybody would be
singin en a dancin when dey had de election:

    'Hancock ride de big gray horse,
    Hampton ride de mule,
    Hancocks got elected,
    Buckras all turn fool.
    Buggety, buggety, buggety etc.'"

"White en black was all in a row dere dancin all night long. Ain' made
no exception."

"I hear talk dat when freedom come here, de niggers was just turn loose
to make dey livin de best way dey could. Say dat some of de white folks
give dey niggers somethin to go on en some of dem didn' spare dem
nothin. Dey tell me old Sherman didn' come through dis section of de
country, but he sent somebody to divide out de things like so much corn
en so much meat to de colored people. Now, I talkin bout dat what I hear
de old people say. Put everything in Ben Thompson hand to deal out de
colored people share to dem. Yes, mam, he was de one had de chair. Talk
bout Sherman give Ben Thompson de chair, sayin what I hear de old people
say. I don' know exactly how it was, it been so long since de old people
talk wid me. Dat it, it been so long till God knows, I forgot."

"Well, I used to know a heap of dem songs dat I hear my auntie en my
grandmammy sing dere home when I was comin up. Let me see, child, dey
was natural born song too.

    'I got somethin to tell you,
    Bow-hoo, oo-hoo, oo-hoo.
    I got somethin to tell you,
    Bow-hoo, oo-hoo, oo-hoo.
    In a bow-hoo, oo-oo-hoo.

    Way cross de ocean,
    'Mongst all dem nation,
    Massa Jesus promise me,
    He gwine come by en by,
    He gwine come by en by.

    Dere many miles round me,
    De curried be so bold,
    To think dat her son, Jesus,
    Could write widout a pen,
    Could write widout a pen.

    De very next blessin dat Mary had,
    She had de blessin of two,
    To think dat her son, Jesus,
    Could bring de crooked to straight,
    Could bring de crooked to straight.'"

"Dat was my auntie's grandmother Eve piece way back yonder in slavery
time. Dat was her piece."

"It just like I tellin you, dat been a day to speak bout. I remember
when dey used to spin en weave all de cloth right dere home. Yes, mam, I
wore many a wove dress to church. Dey would get dis here indigo en all
kind of old bark out de woods en boil it in de pot wid de yarn en make
de prettiest kind of colors. Den dey would take dat colored yarn en
weave all kind of pretty streaks in de cloth. Dey would know just as
good how many yards of dat thread it would take to make so much of
cloth."

"Yes, mam, I know dere been better livin long time ago den dere be now.
Know it cause I didn' never have no worryations no time when I was comin
up. My God, child, I couldn' make a support today if I know my neck had
to be hung on de gallows. No, mam, dis here a sin cussed world de people
livin in dis day en time."


  _Source_: Julia Woodberry, colored, Marion, S.C.
  Personal interview by Annie Ruth Davis, October-November, 1937.
