
The two-story frame house, very plain in appearance, almost square in
shape, located at 400 North Moniteau Street, Sedalia, is the home of Sim
Younger, an interesting product of Negro slavery. He was born May 17,
1850, at Independence, Missouri; at the dawn of the "Golden Age of
Steamboating on the Missouri River" and is a pensioned soldier of the
Civil War.

Traditions and customs of the Old South have stamped their influence on
the modest home. A porch extends across the front of the house and steps
lead to the front door, but neither the porch nor front door are used
much. They are for formal occasions.

However, home life begins with the smaller porch on the south side where
bright flowered morning glory vines climb twine strings, their large
green leaves bringing sheltering shadows to Sim’s favorite resting
place. Here is placed an old-fashioned hickory chair with woven cane
seat which is his haven of peace and comfort.

The yard on this side of the house affords plenty of space for exercise
and a large catalpa tree spreads grateful shade. It was here, under the
catalpa tree that Sim Younger wanted his picture taken while seated in
his favorite chair. There is a quiet, soldierly dignity about the old
Negro that is striking and impressive. He is well preserved for all of
his 87 years and his keen eyes require no glasses. The impress of his
college education and soldierly training are evidenced by his
conversation, bearing and the lack of Negro dialect in his speech.

He courteously expressed pleasure at the request for an interview on
slavery and invited me into the house. The living room where we talked
is large, the floor is covered with linoleum and a leather covered couch
stands against the wall. In the center of the room is a large oak table.
Other furniture consists of two plain oak chairs, but no rocking chairs.

Sim lives alone, and while we were talking a Negro brought in his
breakfast; a pint of milk, an egg and two slices of toast. Although
urged, Sim would not violate his code by eating in my presence.

"My father," he replied in answer to my question, "was Charles Younger,
the originator of the Younger family in Missouri, and grand father of
Cole, Bob, and Jim Younger. My father was my mother’s master. She was a
Simpson. I knew Cole Younger well."

Cole, Bob, and Jim Younger, known as "The Younger Brothers", were
notorious outlaws. It is recorded that Sim’s father was the Younger who
operated a canoe ferry across the Missouri River from Randolph Bluffs,
in 1821, to what is now Kansas City, then known as Chouteau’s Landing.

"My father died when I was five years old, and left mother a farm on
which my brothers and sisters are still living. Father arranged for my
education and by the terms of his will I was sent to Oberlin, Ohio,
where I was reared by Delia Sheppard, in whose care I was placed."

Sim Younger related that he attended Oberlin College, and graduated from
there in 1870. He did not see his mother from the time he was five years
old until he was the age of 21. When comment was made that he did not
use Negro dialect, Sim explained, saying:

"That is due to my early training. Delia Sheppard gave me excellent
training, and I remember everything she told me, even when I was a very
little boy.

"I will always remember one thing she told me," he continued, fondly
reminiscent. "I was just a little boy and she said, ’Sim, if, when
visiting, you find a pin on the floor, put it up and call attention to
it. It does not belong to you.’

"Yes, ma’am," he continued, "I was born in slavery and I enlisted in the
Union Army, January 1, 1864, at Oberlin, Ohio, and according to the
National Tribune, I was one of the youngest soldiers in the ranks.

"I was present at the battle of Petersburg, Virginia, July 30, 1864; one
of the disasters to the Northern forces of the war, and present on June
15, 1864, at the initiatory battle of Deep Bottom, and also at Cold
Harbor.

"I was in the Ninth Army Corps, under Burnside, and was transferred
around, in front of Richmond, Virginia.

"General Butler went down to Fort Fisher and failed, which was the last
open port of the Confederacy. Another expedition was organized and
General Terry given command. We embarked on the night of December 31,
1864; landed the morning of January 13, 1865, on the peninsula. On the
night of January 15, 1865, we captured Fort Fisher.

"We had a terrible, terrible time landing! There was an awful storm! I
was told to jump overboard, and oh my! I swallowed a good deal of the
Atlantic!"

He sat still a moment, living over in memory the thrilling events of
that night at Fort Fisher, then, saddened by the pageant of the past
evoked from memory’s storehouse, he said:

"I want to tell you of one of the tragic things that happened during the
war, and I was there and saw it.

"It was at the Southside railroad, at Petersburg, on September 27, 1865.
I was put on picket duty. The ’Rebs’ had built a fire and the wind was
driving it toward us. They began to holler and cheer, very happy over
the fact.

"All at once we could hear someone coming toward us. The pickets opened
fire on what they thought were ’Rebs’, and found out to their distress
that it was a bunch of recruits from our own lines. Many were killed."

The shadow of this past grief faded from his countenance and in a
brighter mood he exclaimed:

"If I could choose my weapons for the next war, I would choose
doughnuts, to be thrown at each other across the Atlantic."4

   4 Bibliography: E. Miller, W.H., "History of Jackson County, Mo.",
     Kansas City, Mo., Union Hist. Co., 1881. 1006 pp., illus., map.
     Consultant: Pearly Smith English, Service Officer, American Legion,
     (colored), Nineteenth and Missouri Street, Sedalia, Mo.]
